DIANETICALLY, THE OPTI MUM individual is called the Clear.
One will hear much ofthat word, both as a noun and a verb, in this
volume, so it is well to spend time here at the outset setting forth
exactly what can be called a Clear, the goal ofDianetic therapy.
A Clear can be tested for any and all psychoses, neuroses,
compulsions and repressions (all aberrations) and can be examined for
any autogenic (self-generated) diseases referred to as psychosomatic
ills. These tests confirm the Clear to be entirelywithoutsuch ills or
aberrations. Additional tests ofhis intelligence indicate it to be high
above the current norm. Observation of his activity demonstrates
that he pursues existence with vigor and satisfaction.
Further, these results can be obtained on a comparative basis.
A neurotic individual, possessed also of psychosomatic ills, can be
tested for those aberrations and illnesses, demonstrating that they
exist. He can then be given Dianetic therapy to the end ofclearing
these neuroses and ills. FinaII}r, he can be examined, with the above
results. This, in passing, is an experiment which has been performed
many times with invariable results. It is a matter oflaboratory test

that all individuals who have organically complete nervous systems
respond in this fashion to Dianetic clearing.
Further, the Clear possesses attributes, fundamental and inherent
but not always available in an uncleared state, which have not been
suspected ofMan and are not included in past discussions of his
abilities and behavior.
First there is the matter of perceptions. Even so-called normal
people do not always see in full color, hear in full tone, or sense at
the optimum with their organs ofsmell, taste, tactile and organic
sensation.
These are the main lines of communication to the finite
world which most people recognize as reality. It is an interesting
commentary that while past observers felt that the facing ofreality
was an absolute necessity ifthe aberrated individual wished to be
sane, no definition ofhow this was to be done was set forth. To face
reality in the present, one would certainly have to be able to sense
it along those channels of communication most commonly used
by Man in his affairs.
Anyone ofMan's perceptions can be aberrated by psychic
derangements which refuse to permit the received sensations to be
realized by the analytical portion ofthe individual's mind. In other
words, while there may be nothing wrong with the mechanisms
of color reception, circuits can exist in the mind which delete
color before the consciousness is permitted to see the object.
Colorblindness can be discovered to be relative or in degreesin such
a way that colors appear to be less brilliant, dull or, at the maximum,
entirely absent. Anyone is acquainted with persons to whom "loud"
colors are detestable and with persons who find them insufficiently
"loud" to notice. This varying degree ofcolorblindness has not been
recognized as a psychic factor, but has been nebulously assumed to
be some sort ofa condition ofmind when it was noticed at all.
There are those persons to whom noises are quite disturbing, to
whom, for instance, the insistentwhine ofaviolin is very like having
a brace and bit applied to the eardrum; and there are those to whom

The CLEAR
fifty violins, played loudly, would be soothing; and there are those
who, in the presence of a violin, express disinterest and boredom;
and, again, there are persons to whom the sound of a violin, no
matter if it be playing the most intricate melody, is a monotone.
These differences ofsonic (hearing) perception have, like color and
other visual errors, been attributed to inherent nature or organic
deficiency or assigned no place at all.
In a like manner, from person to person, smells, tactile sensations,
organic perceptions, pain and gravity vary widely and wildly. A
cursory check around among his friends will demonstrate to a man
that there exist enormous differences of perception of identical
stimuli. One smells a turkey in the oven as wonderful, one smells
it with indifference, another may notsmell it at all. And somebody
else may maintain that roasting turkey smells exactly like hair oil,
to be extreme.
Until we obtain Clears, it remains obscure why such differences
should exist. For in the largest measure, such wild quality and
quantity ofperception is due to aberration~ Because of pleasurable
experiences in the past and inherent sensitivity, there will be
some difference among Clears and a Clear response should not
be assumed automatically to be a standardized, adjusted middle
ground, that pallid and obnoxious goal ofpast doctrines. The Clear
gets a maximum response compatible with his own desire for the
response. Burning cordite still smells dangerous to him, but it does
not make him ill. Roasting turkey smells good to him ifhe is hungry
and likes turkey; at which time itsmells very, very good. Violins play
melodies, not monotones, bring no pain and are enjoyed to a fine
full limit ifthe Clear likes violins as a matter oftaste-if he doesn't,
he likes kettledrums, saxophones or, indeed, suiting his mood, no
music at all.
In other words, there are two variables at work. One, the wildest,
is the variable caused by aberrations. The other, and quite rational
and understandable, is caused by the personality.

BOOK ONE a CHAPTER Two
Thus the perceptions of an aberree'" (non~Cleared individual)
vary greatly from those ofthe Cleared (unaberrated) individual.
Now there are the differences ofthe actual organs ofperception
and the errors occasioned by these. Some ofthese errors, aminimum,
are organic: punctured eardrums are not competentsound-recording
mechanisms. The majority ofperceptic (sense message) errors in
the organic sphere are caused by psychosomatic errors.
Glasses are seen on noses everywhere around, even on children.
The majority ofthese spectacles are perched on the face in an effort
to correct a condition which the body itselfis fighting to uncorrect
again. Eyesight, when the stage ofglasses is entered (not because of
glasses), is deteriorating on the psychosomatic principle. And this
observation is about asirresponsible as a statement thatwhen apples
fall out oftrees, they usually obey gravity. One ofthe incidental
things which happens to a Clear is that his eyesight, ifit had been
bad as an aberree, generally improves markedly and, with some
slight attention, will recover optimum perception in time. (Far
from an optician's argument against Dianetics, this assures rather
good business, for Clears have been known at treatment's end to
have to bu)', in rapid succession, five pairs ofglasses to compensate
adjusting eyesight, and many aberrees Cleared late in life settle
down ocularly at a maximum a little under optimum.)
The eyesight was reduced in the aberree on an organic basis by
his aberrations so that the perceptic organ itselfwas reduced from
optimum operating function. With the removal of aberrations,
repeated tests have proven that the body makes a valiant effort to
reconstruct back to optimum.
Hearing, in addition to other perceptics, varies organically over a
wide range. Calcium deposits, for instance, can make the ears "ring"
incessantly. The removal ofaberrations pennitsthe body to readjust
toward its reachable optimum: the calcium deposit disappears and
the earsstop ringing. Butfar and beyond this veryspecific case, there
...Aberree is a neologism meaning an aberrated person.

The CLEAR
are great differences in hearing on the organic basis. Organically
as well as aberrationally, hearing can become remarkably extended
or closely inhibited so that one person may hear footsteps a block
away as a normal activity and another would not hear a bass drum
thundering on the porch.
That the various perceptions differ widely from individual to
individual on an aberrational and psychosomatic basis is the least of
the discoveries outlined here. Ability to recall is far more fantastic
in its variation from person to person.
An entirely new recall process, which was inherent in the mind
but which had not been noticed, came to light in the process of
observing Clears and aberrees. This recall process is possible in
only a small proportion ofaberrees in its fullest sense. It is standard,
however, in a Clear. Naturally, no intimation is made here that the
scholars of past ages have been unobservant. We are dealing here
with an entirely new and hitherto non-existent object ofinspection:
the Clear. What a Clear can do easily, quite a few people have, from
time to time, been partially able to do in the past.
An inherent, not a taught, ability ofthe remembering mechanisms
ofthe mind can be termed, as a technical word ofDianetics, returning.
It is used in its dictionary sense, with the addition ofthe fact that
the mind has it as a normal remembering function as follows: the
person can "send" a portion ofhis mind to a past period on either a
mental or combined mental and physical basis and can re-experience
incidents which have taken place in his past in the same fashion and
with the same sensations as before. Once upon a time an art known
as hypnotism used what was called "regression" on hypnotized
subjects, the hypnotistsending the subject back in one oftwo ways
to incidents in his past. This was done with trance techniques, drugs
and considerable technology. The hypnotic subject could be sent
back to a moment "entirely" so that he gave every appearance of
being the age to which he was returned with only the apparent
faculties and recollections he had at that moment: this was called
"revivification" (reliving). "Regression" was a technique by which

BOOK ONE Q CHAPTER Two
part ofthe individual's selfremained in the present and part went
back to the past. These abilities ofthe mind were supposed native
only in hypnotism and were used only in hypnotic technique. The
art is very old, tracing back some thousands ofyears and existing
today in Asia as it has existed, apparently, from the dawn oftime.
Returning is substituted for "regression" here because it is not a
comparable thing and because "regression," as a word, hassome bad
meanings which would interrupt its use. Reliving is substituted for
"revivification" in Dianetics because, in Dianetics, the principles
ofhypnotism can be found explained and hypnotism is not used in
Dianetic therapy, as will be explained later.
Themind, then, has another ability to remember. Partofthe mind
can "return," even when a person is wide awake, and re-experience
past incidents in full. Ifyou want to test this, try it on several people
until one is discovered who does it easily. Wide awake, he can
"return" to moments in his past. Until asked to do so, he probably
will not know he has such an ability. Ifhe had it, he probably thought
everybody could do it (the type ofsupposition which has kept so
much ofthis data from coming to light before). He can go back to
a time when he was swimming and swim with full recall ofhearing,
sight, taste, smell, organic sensation, tactile, etc.
A "learned" gentleman once spent some hours demonstrating
to a gathering that the recall ofa smell as a sensation, for instance,
was quite impossible since "neurology had proven that the
olfactory nerves were not connected to the thalamus." Two
people in the gathering discovered this ability to return and,
despite this evidence, the learned gentleman continued the dispute
that olfactory recall was impossible. A check among the gathering
on this faculty, independent ofreturning, brought forth the fact
that one-half of those present remembered a smell by smelling
it again.
Returning is the full performance ofimagery recall. The entire
memory is able to make the organ areas re-sense the stimuli in a
past incident. Partial recall is common: not common enough to be
18

The CLEAR
nonnal, but certainly common enough to have merited considerable
study. For it again is a wide variable.
Perception ofthe presentwould be one method offacing reality.
But ifone cannot face the reality ofthe past then, in some part, he
is not facing some portion ofreality. And ifit is agreed that facing
reality is desirable, then one would have to face yesterday's reality
as well ifhe were to be considered entirely "sane" by contemporary
definition. To "face yesterday" requires a certain condition ofrecall
to be available. One would have to be able to remember. But how
many ways are there ofremembering?
First there is the return. That is new. It gives the advantage of
examining the moving pictures and othersense perceptions recorded
at the time ofthe event with all senses present. He can also return
to his past conclusions and imaginings. It is of considerable aid in
learning, in research, in ordinary living, to be able to be again at
the place where the data desired was first inspected.
Then there are the more usual recalls. Optimum recall is by the
return method ofsingle or multiple senses, the individual himself
remaining in present time. In other words, some people, when they
think ofa rose, see one, smell one, feel one. They see in full color,
vividly-with the "mind's eye" to use an old colloquialism. They
smell it vividly. And they can feel it even to the thorns. They are
thinking about roses by actually recalling a rose.
These people, thinking about a ship, would see a specific ship,
feel the motion ofher ifthey thought ofbeing aboard her, smell the
pine tar or even less savory odors and hear whatever sounds there
were about her. They would see the ship in full-color motion and
hear it in full-tone audio.
These faculties vary widely in the aberree. Some, when told to
think of a rose, can merely visualize one. Some can smell one but
not see it. Some see it without color or in very pale color. When
told to think of a ship, some aberrees only see a flat, colorless, still
picture such as a painting ofa ship or the photograph ofone. Some
perceive a vessel in motion without color but with sound. Some hear

BOOK ONE Q CHAPTER Two
the sound ofa ship butfail to see any picture whatever. Some merely
think ofa ship as a concept thatships exist and that they know about
them and fail to see, feel, hear, smell or otherwise sense anything
on a recall basis.
Some past observers have called this "imagery," but the term is
so inapplicable to sound and touch, organic sensation and pain that
recall is used uniformly as the technical Dianetic term. The value
ofrecall in this business ofliving has occupied such scant attention
that the entire concept has never been formulated previously. It is
therefore detailed at some length here, as above.
It is quite simple to test recalls. Ifone will ask his fellows what
their abilities are, he will gain a remarkable idea ofhowwidely varied
this ability is from individual to individual. Some have this recall,
some have that, some have none but operate on concepts ofrecall
only. And remember, ifyou make a test on those around you, that
any perception is filed in the memory and therefore has a recall
which is to include pain, temperature, rhythm, taste and weight
with the above mentioned sight, sound, tactile and smell.
The Dianetic namesfor these recalls are vido (sight),sonic (sound),
tactile (touch), olfactory (smell), rhythmic, kinesthetic (weight and
motion), somatic (pain), thermal (temperature) and organic (internal
sensations and, by new definition, emotion).
Then there is another set of mental activities which can be
summated under the headings ofimagination and creative i'fllagination.
Here again is abundant material for testing.
Imagination is the recombination of things one has sensed,
thought or intellectually computed into existence, which do not
necessarily have existence. This is the mind's method ofenvisioning
desirable goals or forecasting futures. Imagination is extremely
valuable as a part of essential solutions in any mental problem and
in everyday existence. That it is recombination in no sense deprives
it ofits vast and wonderful complexity.
AClear uses imagination in its entirety. There is an imagination
impression forsight, smell, taste, sound-in short, for each one ofthe
20

The CLEAR
possible perceptions. These are manufactured impressions on the
basis ofmodels in the memory banks combined by conceptual ideas
and construction. New physical structures, tomorrow in terms of
today, next year in terms oflast year, pleasure to be gained, deeds
to be done, accidents to avoid, all these are imaginational functions.
The Clear has full color-visio, tone-sonic, tactile, olfactory,
rhythmic, kinesthetic, thennal and organic imagination in kind.
Asked to envision himselfriding in a gilded coach and four, he "sees"
the equimoving in full color, he "hears" all the noises which
should be present, he "smells" the smells he thinks should be there,
and he "feels" the upholstery, the motion, and the presence in the
coach of himself.
In addition to standard imagination there is creative imagination.
This is a very wide undimensional ability, quite variable from
individual to individual, possessed in enormous quantity by some. It
is included here, not as a portion ofthe operation ofthe mind treated
as a usual part of Dianetics, but to isolate it as an existing entity.
In a Clear who possessed creative imagination, even ifinhibited, as
an aberree, it is present and demonstrable. It is inherent. It can be
aberrated only by prohibition ofits general practice, which is to say,
by aberrating the persistence in its application or encysting the whole
mind. But creative imagination, that possession by which works of
art are done, states built and Man enriched, can be envisioned as a
special function, independent in operation and in no way dependent
for its existence upon an aberrated condition in the individual, since
the examination ofits activity in and use by a Clear possessing it
adequately demonstrates its inherent character. It is rarely absent
in any individual.
Finally, there is the last, but most important activity of the
mind. Man is to be regarded as a sentient being. His sentience
depends upon his ability to resolve problems by perceiving or
creating and understanding situations. This rationality is the
primar}) high-echelon function ofthat part ofthe mind which makes
him a Man, not just another animal. Remembering, perceiving,
21

BOOK ONE 52 CHAPTER Two
imagining, he has the signal ability ofresolving conclusions and of
using conclusions resolved to resolve further conclusions. This is
rational Man.
Rationality, as divorced from aberration, can be studied in
a Cleared person only. The aberrations of the aberree give him
the appearance of irrationality. Though such irrationality may
be given the gentler names of "eccentricity" or "human error" or
even "personal idiosyncrasJT," it is, nevertheless, irrationality. The
personality does not depend upon how irrationally a man may act.
It is not a personality trait, for instance, to drive while drunk and
kill a child on a crosswalk-or even to risk killing a child by driving
while drunk. Irrationality is simply that: the inability to get right
answers from data.
Now it is a curious thing that although "everybody knows"
(and what a horrible amount ofmisinformation thatstatement lets
circulate) it is "human to err," the sentient portion of the mind
which computes the answers to problems and which makes man
Man is 'Utterly incapable oferror.
This was a startling discovery when it was made, but it need
not have been. It could have been deduced some time before, for
it is quite simple and easy to understand. The actual computing
ability ofMan is never in error, even in a very severely aberrated
person. Observing the activity ofsuch an aberrated person, one
might thoughtlessly suppose that that person's computations were
wrong. But that would be an observer error. Any person, aberrated
or Clear, computes perfectly on the data stored andperceived.
Take any common calculating machine (and the mind is an
exceptionally magnificent instrument far, far superior to any
machine it will invent for ages to come) and put a problem on it
for solution. Multiply 7 times 1. It will answer, properly, 7. Now
multiply 6 times 1 but continue to hold down the 7; 6 times 1 is 6
but the answer you will get is 42. Continue to hold down 7 and put
other problems on the machine. They are wrong, not as problems,
but as answers. Now fix 7 so that itstays down no matter what keys
22

The CLEAR
are touched and try to give the machine away. Nobody will want it
because, obviously, the machine is crazy. Itsays 10 times lois 700.
But is the calculating portion ofthe machine really wrong or is it
merely being fed the wrong data?
In the same way the human mind, being called upon to resolve
problems of a magnitude and with enough variables to confound
any mere calculating machine a thousand times an hour, is prey to
incorrect data. Incorrect data gets into the machine. The machine
gives wrong answers. Incorrect data enters the human memory
banks, the person reacts in an "abnormal manner." Essentially, then,
the problem ofresolving aberration is the problem offinding a
"held-down 7." But ofthat, much, much more, later. Right now we
have accomplished our immediate ends.
These are the various abilities and activities ofthe human mind in
its constant task ofresolving and putting into solution a multitude of
problems. It perceives, it recalls or returns, it imagines, it conceives
and then resolves. Served by its extensions-the perceptics and
the memory banks and the imaginations-the mind brings forth
answers which are invariably accurate, modified only by observation,
education and viewpoint.
And the basic purposes ofthat mind and the basic nature ofMan,
as discoverable in the Clear, are constructive and good, uniformly
constructive and uniformly good, the solutions modified only by
observation, education and viewpoint.
Manis good.
Take away his basic aberrations and with them go the evil ofwhich
the Scholastic and the Moralist were so fond. The only detachable
portion of him is the "evil" portion. And when it is detached, his
personality and vigor intensify. And he is glad to see the "evil"
portion go because it was physicalpain.
Later, there are experiments and proofs for these things and
they can be measured with the precision so dear to the heart ofthe
physical scientist.

BOOK ONE Q CHAPTER Two
The Clear, then, is not an "adjusted" person, driven to activity
by his repressions now thoroughly encysted. He is an unrepressed
person, operating on self-determinism. And his abilities to perceive,
recall, return, imagine, create and compute are outlined as we
have seen.
The Clear is the goal in Dianetic therapy, a goal which some
patience and a little study and work can bring about. Any person
can be Cleared unless he has been so unfortunate as to have had
a large portion ofhis brain removed or to have been born with a
grossly malformed nervous structure.
We have seen the goal ofDianetics here. Let us now inspect the
goal ofMan. a

BOOK ONE, CHAPTER THREE

The GOAL afMAN

THE GOAL OF MAN, the lowest common denominator ofall his
activities, the Dynamic Principle of his Existence, has long been
sought. Should such an answer be discovered, it is inevitable that
from it many answers would flow. Itwould explain all phenomena of
behavior; it would lead toward a solution ofMan's major problems;
and, most ofall, itshould be workable.
Consider all knowledge to fall above or below a line of
demarcation. Everything above this line is not necessary to the
solution of Man's aberrations and general shortcomings and is
inexactly known. Such a field of thought could be considered to
embrace such things as metaphysics and mysticism. Below this line
of demarcation could be considered to lie the finite universe. All
thingsin the finite universe, whether known or as yet unknown, can
be sensed, experienced or measured. The known data in the finite
universe can be classified as scientific truth when it has been sensed,
experienced and measured. All factors necessary to the resolution
ofa science ofthe mind were found within the finite universe and
were discovered, sensed, measured and experienced, and became
scientific truth. The finite universe contains TIME, SPACE, ENERGY
and LIFE. No other factors were found necessary in the equation.

BOOK ONE sal CHAPTER THREE
TIME, SPACE, ENERGY and LIFE have a single denominator
in common. As an analogy, it could be considered that TIME,
SPACE, ENERGY and LIFE began at some point oforigin and were
commanded to continue to some nearly infinite destination. They
were told nothing butwhat to do. They obey a single order and that
order is "SURVIVE!"
THE DYNAMIC PRINCIPLE OF EXISTENCE IS SURVIVAL.
The goal oflife can be considered to be infinite survival. Man,
as a life form, can be demonstrated to obey in all his actions and
purposes the one command: SURVIVE!
It is not a new thought that Man is surviving. It is a new thought
that Man is motivated only by survival.
That his single goal is survival does not mean that he is the
optimum survival mechanismwhich life has attained orwill develop.
The goal ofthe dinosaur was also survival and the dinosaur isn't
extant anymore.
Obedience to this command SURVIVE! does not mean that every
attempt to obey is uniformly successful. Changing environment,
mutation, and many other things militate against anyone organism
attaining infallible survival techniques or form.
Life forms change and die as new life forms develop just as
surely as one life organism, lacking immortality in itself, creates
other life organisms, then dies as itself. An excellent method,
should one wish to cause life to survive over a very long period,
would be to establish means by which it could assume many
forms. And death itselfwould be necessary in orderto facilitate the
survival ofthe life force itself, since only death and decay could
clear away older forms when new changes in the environment
necessitated new forms. Life, as a force existing over a nearly
infinite period, would need a cyclic aspect in its unit organisms
and forms.

26

The GOAL OrMAN
What would be the optimum survival characteristics of
various life forms? They would have to have various fundamental
characteristics, differing from one species to the next just as one
environment differs from the next.
This is important, since it has been but poorly considered in the
past that a set ofsurvival characteristics in one species would not
be survival characteristics in another.
The methods ofsurvival can be summed under the headings
of food, protection (defensive and offensive) and procreation.
There are no existing life forms which lack solutions to these
problems. Every life form errs, one way or another, by holding
a characteristic too long or developing characteristics which
may lead to its extinction. But the developments which bring
about successfulness of form are far more striking than their
errors. The naturalist and biologist are continuaIly resolving the
characteristics of this or that life form by discovering that need
rather than whim govern such developments. The hinges ofthe
clamsheIl, the awesome face on the wings ofthe butterfly, have
survival value.
Once survivalwas isolated as the onlydynamic* ofa life form which
would explain all its activities, it was necessary to study further the
action ofsurvival. And it was discovered that when one considered
pain and pleasure, he had at hand all the necessary ingredients with
which to formulate the action life takes in its effort to survive.
*In order to establish nomenclature in Dianetics which would not be too complex
for the purpose, words normally considered as adjectives or verbs have occasionally
been pressed into service as nouns. This has been done on the valid principle that
existing terminology, meaning so many different things, could not be used by
Dianetics without making it necessary to explain away an old meaning to bring
forth a new. To remove the step ofexplaining the old meaning and saying then that
one doesn't mean that, thus entangling our communications inextricably, and to
obviate the ancient custom of compounding ponderous and thundering syllables
from the Greek and Roman tongues, this principle and some others have been
adopted for nomenclature. D)'fltmt-ic is here used as a noun and will so continue to
be used throughout this volume. Somatic, perceptic and some others will be noted,
defined when used.

BOOK ONE g CHAPTER THREE
As will be seen in the accompanying graph," a spectrum oflife has
been conceived to span from the zero ofdeath or extinction toward
the infinity ofpotential immortality. This spectrum was considered
to contain an infinity oflines, extending ladder-like toward the
potential ofimmortality. Each line, as the ladder mounted, was
spaced a little wider than the last, in a geometric progression.
The thrust ofsurvival is away from death and toward immortalit}r.
The ultimate pain could be conceived as existing just before death
and the ultimate pleasure could be conceived as immortality.
Immortality could be said to have an attractive type offorce, and
death a repelling force, in the consideration ofthe unit organism
or the species. But as survival rises higher and higher toward
immortality, wider and wider spaces are encountered until the gaps
are finitely impossible to bridge. The urge is away from death,
which has a repelling force, and toward immortality; which has an
attracting force; the attracting force is pleasure, the repelling force
is pain.
For the individual, the length ofthe arrow could be considered
to be at a high potential within the fourth zone. Here the survival
potentialwould be excellentand the individualwould enjoyexistence.
From left to right could be graphed the years.
The urge toward pleasure is dynamic. Pleasure is the reward; and
the seeking ofthe reward- survival goals- would be a pleasurable
act. And to ensure thatsurvival is accomplished under the mandate
SURVIVE! it seems to have been provided that reduction from a
high potential would bring pain.
Pain is provided to repel the individual from death; pleasure
is provided to call him toward optimum life. The search for and the
attainment ofpleasure is notless valid in survival than the avoidance of
pain. In fact, on some observed evidence, pleasure seems to have a
much greater value in the cosmic scheme than pain.
*A foldout version ofthis graph is contained at the back ofthis book.

28

Lines ina
geometric
progression of
spacing, the inner
widths being both
a quantity of
pleasure possible
and survival
forecast for the
organism. Showing
lessening degrees
ofnon-survival as
immortality is
approached.

DESCRIPTIC GRAPH OF SURVIVAL
POTENTIAL IMMORTALITY - ULTIMATE PLEASURE --
-a.

ZONE 4
P:--_+-----___l__-----+_-----_+-- ..l 0 --t------+------t-~~---+--------ll-------+-------+-- --f-------t--------+->:---I------___ll__-----+_------I--- --f-------t--------+-!3 ;:---I------___ll__-----+_-----_+-- --f-------t--------+-CI:l~---+--------lI-------+-------+--
........ ~,

_- _..;; - • • a- a • • a •

-- - - - - - -,. ~, ...... " ZONE 3 ..... ~" ...

"
"
" ..l U
i ZONE:1
):

l:ll >- aO ~~l I _ -__ ZONE 0

. DEATH - ULTIMATE PAIN
I

Man's Survival
His Child
His Grandchild

Survival Suppressor
is the effort of
other life forms and
energy of other
kinds to survive.
Survival Dynamic
as a level of
physical being or
mental being. All
thrust is upward as
a repulsion of pain
and an attraction
for pleasure.

lOYRS 20 YRS 30YRS 40YRS 50YRS 60YRS 70YRS

BOOK ONE sal CHAPTER THREE
Now it would be well to define what is meant by pleasure aside
from its connection with immortaIit~ The dictionary states that
pleasure is "gratification; agreeable emotions, mental or physical;
transient enjoyment; opposed to pain." Pleasure can be found in
so many things and activities that a catalog of all the things and
activities Man has, does and may consider pleasurable alone could
round out the definition.
And what do we mean by pain? The dictionary states: "physical
or mental suffering; penalty."
These two definitions, in passing, are demonstrative of an
intuitive type ofthought which runs through the language. Once
one has a thing which leads to the resolution ofhitherto unsolved
problems, even the dictionaries are found to have "always known it."
Ifwe wished to make this graph for a life-form cycle, it would
be identical except that the value ofthe years would be increased to
measure eons. For there is no difference, itseems, exceptmagnitude,
in the scope ofthe individual and the scope ofthe species. This
inference could be drawn even withoutsuch remarkable evidence as
the fact that a human being, growing from zygote to adult, evolutes
through all the forms which the whole species is supposed to have
evolved through.
Now there is more in this graph than has been remarked as yet.
The physical and mental state ofthe individual varies from hour
to hour, day to day, year to year. Therefore, the level ofsurvival
would form either a daily curve or the curve of a life on a measure
of hourly or yearly position in the zones. And there would be two
curves made possible by this: the physical curve and the mental
curve. When we get toward the back ofthe book, the relationships
between these two curves will be found vital and itwiII also be seen
that, ordinarily, a sag in the mental curve will precede a sag in the
physical curve.
The zones, then, can apply to two things: the physical being and
the mental being. Therefore, these four zones can be called zones of
the states ofbeing. If a person is happy mentally, the survival level
3°

The GOAL ofMAN
can be placed in Zone 4. Ifthe person is extremely ill physically, he
might be plotted, on estimation of his illness, in Zone 1 or close
to death.
Very unprecise but nevertheless descriptive names have been
assigned to these zones:
Zone 3 is one of general happiness and well-being.
Zone 2 is a level ofbearable existence.
Zone 1 is one ofanger.
Zone 0 is the zone ofapathy.
These zones can be used as a Tone Scale by which a state of
mind can be graded. Just above death, which is 0, would be the
lowest mental apathy or lowest level ofphysical life, 0.1. ATone 1,
where the body is fighting physical pain or illness or where the
being is fighting in anger, could be graded from 1.0, which would
be resentment or hostility, through Tone 1.5, which would be a
screaming rage, to a 1.9, which would be merely a quarrelsome
inclination. FromTone 2.0 to Tone 3.0, there would be an increasing
interest in existence, and so forth.
Itso happensthat the state ofphysical being ormental being does
not long remain static. Therefore, there are various fluctuations.
In the course ofa single day an aberree may run from 0.5 to 3.5, up
and down, as a mental being. An accident or illness could cause a
similar fluctuation in a day.
These are, then, figures which can be assigned to four things:
the mental state on an acute basis and the mental state on a general,
average basis, and the physical being on an acute basis and the
physical being on a general basis. In Dianetics, we do not much
employ the physical Tone Scale. The mental Tone Scale, however,
is ofvast and vital importance!
These values ofhappiness, bearable existence, anger and apathy
are not arbitrary values. They are deduced from observation of
the behavior of emotional states. A Clear is usually found varying
around Tone 4, plus or minus in an average day. He is a general
31

BOOK ONE a CHAPTER THREE
Tone 4, which is one of the inherent conditions of being Clear.
A norm in current society, at a wild guess, is probably around a
general Tone 2.8.
In this descriptic graph, which is two-dimensional, the vital data
for the solution ofthe problem ofthe life dynamic are workably
combined.The horizontal lines are in tenus ofgeometric progression
beginning with the zero line immediately above death. There are
ten lines for each zone and each zone denotes a mental or physical
state of being, as noted. Geometric progression, so used, leaves
ever-increasing spaces between the lines. The width ofthis space is
the survival potential existing at the moment the top point ofthe
survival dynamic arrow is within thatspace. The further away from
death the top point ofthe survival dynamic arrow is, the better
chance the individual has ofsurvival. Geometric progression reaches
up toward the impossible ofinfinity and cannot, of course, reach
infinity. The organism is surviving through time from left to right.
Survival optimum-immortality-lies in tenus oftime to the right.
Potential only is measured vertically.
The survival dynamic actually resides within the organism as
inherited from the species. The organism is part ofthe species as
a railroad tie might be said to be part of a railroad as seen by an
observer on a train, the observer being always in "now"- although
this analogy is not perhaps the best.
Within itself, the organism possesses a repulsive force toward
pain sources. The source ofthe pain is not a driving force any more
than the thorn bush which tears the hand was a driving force; the
organism repulses the potential pain ofa thorn.
At the same time, the organism has atwork a force which attracts
it to the sources of pleasure. Pleasure does not magnetize the
organism into drawing near. Itis the organism which possesses the
attraction force. Itis inherent.
The repulsion ofpain sources adds to the attraction for pleasure
sources to operate as a combined thrust away from death and toward
immortality. The thrust away from death is no more powerful

The GOAL ofMAN
than the thrust toward immortality. In other words, in tenns ofthe
survival dynamic, pleasure has as much validity as pain.
It should not be read here that survival is always a matter of
keeping an eye on the future. Contemplation of pleasure, pure
enjoyment, contemplation of past pleasures, all combine into
harmonies which, while they operate automatically as a rise toward
the survival potential by their action within the organism physically,
do not demand the future as an active portion of the mental
computation in such contemplation.
A pleasure which reacts to injure the body physically, as in the
case ofdebauchery, discovers at work a ratio between the physical
effect (which is depressed toward pain) and the mental effect of
experienced pleasure. There is a consequent lowering ofthe survival
dynamic. Averaging out, the future possibility ofstrain because of
the act, added to the state ofbeing at the moment the debaucherywas
experienced, again depresses the survival dynamic. Because ofthis,
various kinds ofdebauchery have been in indifferent odor with Man
throughout his history. This is the equation of"immoral pleasures."
And any action which has brought about survival suppression or
which can bring it about, when pursued as a pleasure, has been
denounced atsome time or another in Man's history. Immorality is
originally hung as a label upon some act or class ofactions because
they depress the level ofthe survival dynamic. Future enforcement
ofmoral stigma may depend largely upon prejudice and aberration
and there is, consequently, a continuous quarrel over what is moral
and what is immoral.
Because certain things practiced as pleasures are actually
pains-and how easy itwill be to trace out whywhen you've finished
this volume-and because ofthe moral equation as above, pleasure
itself, in any aberrated society, can become decried. A certain kind
of thinking, of which more, later, permits poor differentiation
between one object and another. Confusing a dishonest politician
with all politicians would be an example ofthis. In ancient times the
Roman was fond of his pleasures and some ofthe things he called
33

BOOK ONE a CHAPTER THREE
pleasure were a trifle strenuous on otherspeciessuch as Christians.
When the Christian overthrew the pagan state, the ancient order
of Rome was in a villain's role. Anything, therefore, which was
Roman was villainous. This went to such remarkable lengths that
the Roman love of bathing made bathing so immoral that Europe
went unwashed for some fifteen hundred years. The Roman had
become a pain source so general that everything Roman was evil
and itstayed evil long after Roman paganism perished. ImmoraIit}r,
in such a fashion, tends to become an involved subject. In this case
it became so involved that pleasure itselfwas stigmatized.
When half the survival potential is struck from the list of
lawful things, there is a considerable reduction in survival indeed.
Considering this graph on a racial scale, the reduction ofsurvival
potential by one-halfwould forecast that direful things lay in wait
for the race. Actually, because Man is after all Man, no set of
laws, however enforced, can completely wipe away the attraction
of pleasure. But in this case, enough WItS removed and banned to
occasion precisely what happened: the DarkAges and the recession
ofsociety. Society brightened only in those periods such as the
Renaissance in which pleasure became less unlawful.
When a race or an individual drops into the second zone, as
marked on the chart, and the general tone ranges from the first
zone barely into the third, a condition ofinsanity ensues. Insanity
is irrationality. It is also a state in which non-survival has been so
closelyapproached continuallythat the race orthe organism engages
in all manner ofwild solutions.
In further interpretation ofthis descriptic graph, there is the
matter ofthe survivalsuppressor. This, it will be seen, is a thrust
downward out of potential immortality at the race or organism
represented as the survival dynamic. The survival suppressor is
the combined and variable threats to the survival of the race or
organism. These threats come from otherspecies, from time, from
other energies. These are also engaged in the contest ofsurvival to

34

The GOAL OrMAN
potential immortality in terms of their own species or identities.
Thus there is a conflict involved. Every other fonn oflife or energy
could be plotted in a descriptic as the Sltrvival dynamic. Ifwe were
to use a duck's survival dynamic in a descriptic graph, we would see
the duck seeking a high Sltrvivallevel and Man would be a part of
the duck's suppressor.
The balance and nature ofthings do not permit the infinity of
the goal ofimmortality to be reached. In fluctuating balance and
in almost unlimited complexity; life and energies ebb and flood out
ofthe nebulous, into fonns and, through decay, into the nebulous
once more.* Many equations could be drawn concerning this, but
it is outside the sphere ofour present interest.
In terms ofthe zones ofthe descriptic, it is ofrelative concern
what the extent ofthe force ofthe suppressor is against the survival
dynamic. The dynamic is inherent in individuals, groups and races,
evolved to resist the suppressor through the eons. In the case of
Man, he carries with him another level of offensive and defensive
techniques: his cultures. His primary technology ofsurvival is
mental activity governing physical action in the sentient echelon.
But every life form has its own technology, formed to resolve
the problems offood, protection and procreation. The degree of
workability ofthe technology any life form develops (armor or
brains, fleetness offoot or deceptive form) is a direct index ofthe
survival potential, the relative immortality, ofthat form. There
have been vast upsets in the past: Man, when he developed into the
world's most dangerous animal (he can and does kill or enslave any
life form, doesn't he?), overloaded the suppressor on many other
life forms and they dwindled in number or vanished.
A great climatic change, such as the one which packed so many
mammoths in Siberian ice, may overload the suppressor on a life
form. Along drought in the American Southwest in not too ancient
times wiped out the better part ofan Indian civilization.
*The Veda; also Lucretius' Natllre ofTbiTlgs.

35

BOOK ONE 12 CHAPTER THREE
A cataclysm such as an explosion ofthe core ofthe Earth, ifthat
were possible, orthe atom bomb or the sudden cessation ofburning
on the Sun would wipe out all life forms on Earth.
And a life form can even overload the suppressor on itself. A
dinosaur destroys all hisfood and so destroys the dinosaur. Abubonic
plague bacillus attacks its hosts with such thorough appetite that the
whole generation ofPasteurella pestis vanishes. Such things are not
intended by the suicide to be suicide: the life form has run up against
an equation which has an unknown variable, and the unknown
variable unfortunately contained enough value to overload the
suppressor. This is the "didn't know the gun was loaded" equation.
And ifthe bubonic plague bacillus overloads its own suppressor in
an area and then ceases to trouble its food and shelter (the animals),
then the animals consider themselves benefited.
Reckless and clever and well-nigh indestructible, Man has led a
course which is a far cry from "tooth and claw" in every sphere. And
so have the redwood tree and the shark.Just as a life form, Man,
like every life form, is "symbiotic." Life is a group effort. Lichens
and plankton and algae may do very well on sunlight and minerals
alone, but they are the building blocks. Above such existence, as
the forms grow more complex, a tremendousinterdependence exists.
It is very well for a forester to believe that certain trees willfully
kill all other varieties oftrees around them and then conclude a
specious "attitude" oftrees. Let him look again. What made the
soil? What provides the means of keeping the oxygen balance?
What makes it possible for rain to fall in other areas? These willful
and murderous trees. And squirrels plant trees. And Man plants
trees. And trees shelter trees ofanother kind. And animals fertilize
trees. And trees shelter animals. And trees hold the soil so less
well-rooted plants can grow. Look anywhere and everywhere and
we see life as an assist for life. The multitude ofthe complexities
oflife as affinities for life is not dramatic. But they are the steady,
practical, important reason life can continue to exist at all.

The GOAL OrMAN
A redwood tree may be first outfor redwood trees and although
it does an excellent job ofseeming to exist as redwood alone, a closer
glance will show it has dependencies and is depended upon.
Therefore, the dynamic ofany life form can be seen to be assisted
by many other dynamics and combines with them against the
suppressive factors. None survive alone.
Necessity has been declared to be a very wonderful thing. But
necessity is a word which has been taken rather loosely for granted.
Opportunismseemsto have been read largely into necessity. What is
necessity? Besides being the "mother ofinvention," is it a dramatic,
sudden thingwhich excuses wars and murders, which touches a man
only when he is about to starve? Or is necessity a much gentler and
less dramatic quantity? "Everything," according to Leucippus, "is
driven by necessity." This is a keynote ofmuch theorizing down
through the ages. Driven, that is the key to the error. Driven, things
are driven. Necessity drives. Pain drives. Necessity and pain, pain
and necessity.
Recalling the ·dramaticand overlooking the important, Man has
conceived himself, from time to time, to be an object of chase by
necessity and pain. These were two anthropomorphic (manlike)
things which, in full costume, stuck spears at him. It can be said
to be a wrong concept merely because it does not work to produce
more answers.
Whatever there is ofnecessity is within him. Nothing is driving
him except his original impetus to survive. And he carries that
within himselfor his group. Within him is the force with which he
fends offpain. Within himisthe force with which he attracts pleasure.
It chances to be a scientific fact that Man is a self-determined
organism to the outermost limit that any form oflife can be, for he
still depends upon other forms oflife and his general environment.
But he is self-determined. This is a matter which will be covered
later. Butright here it is necessary to indicate that he is not inherently
a determined organism in the sense that he is driven on this
wonderful stimulus-response basis which looks so neat in certain
37

BOOK ONE a CHAPTER THREE
textbooks and works so completely unworkably in the world of
Man. The happy little illustrations about rats do not serve when
we are talking about Man. The more complex the organism, the
less reliably the stimulus-response equation works. And when
one reaches that highest complexity, Man, he has reached a fine
degree of variability in terms ofstimulus-response. The more
sentient, the more rational an organism, the more that organism
is self-determined. Self-determinism, like all things, is relative.
Compared to a rat, however, Man is very self-determined indeed.
This is only a scientific fact because it can easily be proven.
The more sentient the man, the less he is a "push-button"
instrument. Aberrated and reduced, he can, of course, in a limited
degree, be made to perform like a marionette; but then it is
understood that the more aberrated a person is, the closer he
approaches the intelligence quotient of an animal.
Given this self-determinism, it is interesting to observe what
a man does with it. While he can never escape the "didn't know
it was loaded" equation in terms of cataclysm or the unexpected
gain ofsome other life form, he operates in a high zone level of
survival potential. But here he is, self-determined, rational, his
primary weapon, his mind, in excellent working order. What are
his necessity instincts?
Necessity, according to that very sentient if rapidly
subject-changing article, the dictionary, is "the state of being
necessary; that which is unavoidable; compulsion." It also adds
that necessity is "extreme poverty," but we don't want that. We are
talking aboutsurvival.
The compulsion mentioned can be re-evaluated in terms ofthe
survival dynamic. Thatis interior in the organism and the race. And
what is "necessary" to survival?
We have seen and can prove clinically that there are two factors
at work. The necessity ofavoiding pain is a factor because, degree
by degree, little things, not much in themselves, can amount to
large pains which, compounded in thatrapid geometric progression,

The GOAL ofMAN
bring on death. Pain is the sadness of being bawled out for poor
work, because that may lead to being fired, which may lead to
starvation, which may lead to death. Run any equation into which
pain has entered and it can be seen that it reduces down to possible
non-survival. And if this were all there were to surviving and if
necessitywere a vicious little gnome with a pitchfork, itseems rather
obvious that there would be scant reason to go on living. But there
is the other part ofthe equation: pleasure. Thatis a more stable part
than pain, Stoics to the contrary, as clinical tests in Dianetics prove.
There is therefore a necessity for pleasure, for working, as
happiness can be defined, toward known goals over not unknowable
obstacles. And the necessity for pleasure is such that a great deal of
pain can be borne to attain it. Pleasure is the positive commodity.
It is enjoyment ofwork, contemplation of deeds well done; it is a
good book or a good friend; it is taking all the skin off one's knees
climbing the Matterhorn; it is hearing the kid first say daddy; it
is a brawl on the Bund at Shanghai or the whistle of amour from
a doorway; it's adventure and hope and enthusiasm and "someday
I'll learn to paint"; it's eating a good meal or kissing a pretty girl
or playing a stiff game of bluff on the stock exchange. It's what
Man does that he enjoys doing; it's what Man does that he enjoys
contemplating; it's what Man does that he enjoys remembering;
and it may be just the talk ofthings he knows he'll never do.
Man will endure a lot of pain to obtain a little pleasure. Out in
the laboratory ofthe world, it takes very little time to confirm that.
And how does necessity fit this picture? There is a necessity for
pleasure, a necessity as live and quivering and vital as the human
heart itself. He who said that a man who had two loaves of bread
should sell one to buy white hyacinth, spoke sooth. The creative,
the constructive, the beautiful, the harmonious, the adventurous,
yes, and even escape from the maw of oblivion, these things are
pleasure and these things are necessity. There was a man once who
had walked a thousand miles just to see an orange tree and another
39

BOOK ONE a CHAPTER THREE
who was a mass ofscars and poor-set bones who was eager just to
get a chance to "fan another bronc."
It is very well to dwell in some Olympian height and write a
book ofpenalties and very well to read to find whatwriterssaid that
other writers said, but it is not very practical.
The pain-drive theory does not work. Ifsome ofthese basics
ofDianetics were only poetry about the idyllic state ofMan, they
might be justified in that. But it happens that out in the laboratory
ofthe world, they work.
Man, in affinity with Man, survives. And that survival is
pleasure. Q

BOOK ONE, CHAPTER FOUR

The FOUR DYNAMICS

INTHE ORIGINAL equations ofDianetics, when the research was
young, it was believed thatsurvival could be envisioned in personal
tenns alone and still answer all conditions. A theory is only as good
as it works. And it works as well as it explains observed data and
predicts new material which will be found, in fact, to exist.
Survival in personal terms was computed until the whole activity
of Man could be theoretically explained in terms ofself alone.
The logic looked fairly valid. But then it was applied to the world.
Somethingwas wrong: it did notsolve problems. In fact, the theory
ofsurvival in personal terms alone was so unworkable that it left
a majority of behavior phenomena unexplained. But it could be
computed and it still looked good.
Then it was that a nearly intuitive idea occurred. Man's
understanding developed in ratio to his recognition of his
brotherhood with the Universe. That was high flown, but it yielded
results.
Was Man himself a brotherhood ofMan? He had evolved and
become strong as a gregarious being, an animal that hunted in packs.

BOOK ONE a CHAPTER FOUR
Itseemed possible that all his activities could be computed in terms
ofthe survival ofthe group. That computation was made. It looked
good. Man survived, itwas postulated, solelyin terms ofthe survival
of his group. It looked good, but it left a majority of observed
phenomena unexplained.
It was attempted, then, to explain Man's behavior in terms of
Mankind alone, which isto say, itwas assumed thatMankind survived
for Mankind in a highly altruistic way. This was straight down the
sylvan path ofJean Jacques Rousseau. It could be computed that
Man lived alone for the survival ofall Mankind. Butwhen addressed
to the laboratory-the world-it did not work.
Finally, it was recalled that some had thought that Man's entire
activity and all his behavior could be explained by assuming that he
lived for sex alone. This was not an original assumption. Butsome
original computations were made upon it and it is true that, by a
few quick twists ofthe equation, his survival activity can be made
to resolve on only the sexual basis. But when this was applied to
observed data, again it failed to explain every phenomenon.
An examination was made ofwhat had been attempted. It had
been assumed thatMan survived only for himselfas an individual; it
had been computed that he survived only for the group, the pack, for
society; it had been postulated that he survived only for Mankind;
and finally, it had been theorized that he lived only for sex. None
worked alone.
A new computation was made on the survival dynamic. Exactly
for what was Man surviving? All four ofthese factors, self, sex, group
and Mankind, were entered into a new equation. And now it was
found, a theorywas in hand which worked. It explained all observed
phenomena and it predicted new phenomena which were discovered
to exist. It was a scientific equation, therefore!
From the survival dynamic, in this fashion, were evolved the
four dynamics. By survival dynamic was meant the basic command
"SURVIVE!" which underlay all activity. By dynamic was meant
one ofthe four purpose divisions ofthe entire dynamic principle.

The FOUR DYNAMICS
The four dynamics were not new forces, they were subdivisions of
the primary force.
DYNAMIC ONE is the urge toward ultimate survival on
the part ofthe individual and for himself. It includes his
immediate symbiotes,* the extension ofculture for his own
benefit and name immortality.
DYNAMIC TWO is the urge ofthe individual toward ultimate
survival via the sex act, the creation of and the rearing
of children. It includes their symbiotes, the extension of
culture for them and their future provision.
DYNAMIC TH REE is the urge of the individual toward
ultimate survival for the group. It includes the symbiotes
ofthe group and the extension ofits culture.
DYNAMIC FOUR includes the urge ofthe individual toward
ultimate survival for all Mankind. It includes the symbiotes
ofMankind and the extension ofits culture.
Life, the atom and the universe and energy itself are included
under the symbiotic classification.
Itwill be seen immediately that these four dynamics are actually
a spectrum without sharp division lines. The survival dynamic
can be seen to sweep out from the individual to embrace the entire
species and its symbiotes.
None ofthese dynamics is necessarily stronger than any ofthe
others. Each is strong. They are the four roads a man takes to
survival. And the four roads are actually one road. And the one road
is actually a spectrum ofthousands ofroads contained within the
four. They are all in terms of past, present and future in that the
present may be a sum ofthe past and the future may be the product
ofthe past and present.
"The Dianetic meaning ofsymbiote is extended beyond the dictionary definition to
mean "any or all life or energy forms which are mutually dependent for survival."
The atom depends on the Universe, the Universe on the atom.

43

BOOK ONE Q CHAPTER FOUR
All the purposes ofMan can be considered to lie within this
spectrum and all behavior becomes explained.
That Man is selfish is a valid statement when one means an
aberratedMan. ThatMan is antisocial is an equally valid statement
if one adds the modifier, aberration. And other such statements
resolve equally.
Nowithappensthat these four dynamics can be seen to compete,
one with another, in their operation within an individual or a societ}'.
There is a rational reason for this. The phrase "social competition"
is a compound ofaberrated behavior and sentient difficulties.
Any man, group or race may be in contest with any race, group
or man and even in contest with sex on an entirely rationalleveI.
The Equation ofthe Optimum Solution would be that aproblem
hasbeen wellresolvedwhich portendsthe maximumgoodforthe maximum
numberofdynamics.That is to say that any solution, modified by the
time available to put the solution into effect, should be creative or
constructive for the greatest possible number of dynamics. The
optimum solution for any problem would be a solution which
achieved the maximum benefit in all the dynamics. This means
that a man, determining upon some project, would fare best if he
benefited everything concerned in the four dynamics as his project
touched them. He would then have to benefit himself, as well, for the
solution to be optimum. In otherwords, the benefiting ofthe Group
and Mankind Dynamics, but the blocking ofthe Sex Dynamic and
the SelfDynamicwould be much poorerthan the bestsolution. The
conductsurvivalpattern is built upon this Equation ofthe Optimum
Solution. It is the basic equation of all rational behavior and is the
equation on which a Clear functions. It is inherent in Man.
In other words, the best solution to any problem is that which
will bring the greatest good to the greatest number of beings,
including self, progeny, family associates, political and racial groups,
and at length to all Mankind. The greatest good may require, as
well, some destruction, but the solution deteriorates in a ratio to
the destructiveness employed. Self-sacrifice and selfishness are
44

The FOUR DYNAMICS
alike reductive ofthe optimum action equation and alike have been
suspected and should be.
This is entirely a matter of: does itwork? Even on an unaberrated
basis, there are times when one or another ofthese dynamics has
to be dropped from the computation ofsome activity or other and,
indeed, few problems are so entirely intense that they must take
into account all the dynamics. But when a problem achieves such
intensity, and time is not an important factor, serious errors can
follow the omission of one or another of the dynamics from the
factors considered.
In the case ofa Napoleon "saving France" at the expense ofthe
remainder ofMankind in Europe, the Equation ofthe Optimum
Solution wasso far neglected that all the revolutionary gains ofthe
French people were lost. In the case ofCaesar "saving Rome," the
equation was so poorly done that the survival ofRome was impeded.
But there are special cases when the Equation ofthe Optimum
Solution becomes so involved with time that certain dynamics must
be neglected to permit other dynamics to persist. The case ofa sailor
giving his own life to save his ship answers the Group Dynamic.
Such an action is a valid solution to a problem. But it violates the
optimttm solution because it did not answer for Dynamic One: self.
Many examples ofvarious kinds could be cited where one or
another ofthe dynamics must, of necessity, receive priority, all on
an entirely rational basis.
On an aberrated basis the equation is still valid, but complicated
by irrationalities which have no part ofthe situation. Many solutions
are bad merely because offalse educational data or no data at all.
But these are still solutions. In the case of aberrated solutions, the
dynamics are actually and actively impeded, as will later be outlined
in full. 52

45

BOOK ONE, CHAPTER FIVE

SUMMARY

THE DYNAMIC Principle ofExistence is SURVIVAL.
This survival can be graduated into four zones, each one
progressively portending a better opportunity of reaching the
potential ofimmortality. Zone 0 borders from death and includes
apathy; Zone 1 borders from apathy and includes violent effort;
Zone 2 borders from violence into mediocre but not entirely
satisfactory success; Zone 3 borders from the mediocre to the
excellent chance. These zones are each occasioned by the ratio
of the s'ltppressor to the survival dynamic. In apathy, Zone 0, the
suppressor appears too great to be overcome. In the area of
violence, Zone 1, the suppressor more or less overbalances the
survival dynamic, requiring enormous effort which, when expended
without result, drops the organism into the 0 Zone. In the area
of mediocrity, Zone 2, the suppressor and the survival dynamic
are more or less evenly balanced. In the area of Zone 3, the
survival dynamic has overcome the suppressor and, the chances of
survival being excellent, is the area of high response to problems.

47

BOOK ONE Q CHAPTER FIVE
These four zones might be classed as the zone ofno hope, the zone
of violent action, the area of balance and the area of high hope.
Clinical experiment is the basis ofthese zones, since they follow a
progress ofmental or physical being as it rises from the death area
into high existence.
The four dynamics are subdivisions ofthe survival dynamic and
are, in Mankind, the thrust toward potential survival in terms of
entities. They embrace all the purposes, activities and behavior
ofMankind. They could be said to be a conduct survival pattern.
The first of these, but not necessarily the most important nor
yet the one which will receive priority in various efforts, is the
Individual Dynamic, DYNAMIC ONE, which includes the personal
survival ofthe individual as a living person and the survival of his
personal symbiotes. DYNAMIC TWO is the thrust toward potential
immortality through children and includes all sexual activity as
well as the symbiotes ofthe children. DYNAMIC THREE is survival
in terms of the group, which term may include such things as a
club, a military company, a city, a state, a nation; this would include
the symbiotes ofthe group. DYNAMIC FOUR is the thrust toward
potential immortality ofMankind as a species and the symbiotes
ofMankind. Embraced within these classifications are any part of
existence, any form ofmatter and, indeed, the Universe.
Any problem orsituation discoverable within the activities or
purposes ofMankind is embraced within these dynamics.
The Equation ofthe Optimum Solution is inherent within the
organism and, modified by education or viewpoint and modified
further by time, is the operating method ofunaberrated ~ndividuals,
groups or Mankind. The Equation of the Optimum Solution is
always present even in severely aberrated individuals and is used
as modified by their education, viewpoint and available time. The
aberration does not remove activity from the dynamics ofsurvival.
Aberrated conduct isirrationalsurvival conduct and isfully intended
to lead to survival. That the intent is not the act does not eradicate
the intent.

second month
of pregnancy until birth. ix.
fidelity: adherence to fact or detail. 434-
field: 1. a sphere ofactivit)', interest, action or operation, etc. ii.
2. a space where a specific, measurable force exists. 352.
fiendish: very cruel and wicked. 192.
file clerk: the bank monitor. "He" monitors for both the reactive
engram bank and the standard banks. When he is asked for a datum
by the auditor or "I", he will hand out a datum to the auditor via "I".
The file clerk is covered in Book Three, Chapter Five, Returning,
the File Clerk and the Time Track.


DIANETICS: THE MODERN SCIENCE OF MENTAL HEALTH
filters: in radios, electronic components which block out unwanted
radio waves traveling through the air so that the radio receives a
specified, correct signal.
fireplugs: another name for fire hydrants.
fission reaction: a reference to the chain reaction that takes place
when the center portion ofan atom (the nucleus) is split (fissioned)
into smaller parts, with these smaller parts ejecting outward and
splitting other atoms, which in turn split others in an ever-widening
reaction. 176.
flaming youth: a reference to young people and their vigorous,
colorful and unrestrained behavior, particularly during the 1920s in
America. 224.
flash answer: see Book Three, Chapter Nine: Part One, section
entitled "The Flash Answer." 341.
flat: absolute, downright or positive; without qualification. 438.
fleebless offoot: the ability to run fast. 35.
flint and steel: a method ofstarting a fire from the sparks given off
by flint (a hard stone) when it is struck with iron or steel. 489.
flippant: lacking in seriousness; disrespectful. 389.
floundered: struggled clumsily or helplessly or in a confused manner.
154-
flounder, out like a: unconscious. Aj1011nder is a flatfish that lives on
the bottom ofthe ocean, habitually rests on one side and is often
partially buried in the mud or sand giving the appearance ofbeing
dead or unconscious. 298.
flutters: moves unsteadily, backward and forward, here and there,
with quick sometimes irregular movements. 4°4-
foible(s): 1. a minor flaw or shortcoming in personal character or
behavior; failing; weakness, as in ''who do notrealize some ofthe foibles
ofwhich Man in an aben-ated .rtate is capable. "204.
2. an odd or eccentric interest in something; a fad, as in "Their
'symbology' is a mysticfoible. "360.
for all: in spite ofthe fact. For all implies that something is true even
though there are some obstacles or opposing conditions. 2.
forebear: ancestor, forefather. 156.
foreshortens: reduces, contracts or makes shorter. 262.
forlorn: deserted or abandoned and showing signs ofneglect. 107.

EDITOR'S GLOSSARY OF WORDS, TERMS AND PHRASES
formulated: expressed in precise fonn; stated definitely orsystematically.
Pageii.
forthright: straightforward or direct; proceeding on a straight course
with nothing unusual entered in. 330.
fostered: promoted or encouraged, as in terms ofgrowth, development
or the like. 371.
foul: 1. notably unpleasant or distressing; morally degraded. 162.
2. cause (something) to become entangled or muddled. 400.
Frankenstein, Doctor: a characterin a novel by English novelistMary
Shelley (1797-1851). Frankenstein creates a monsterin his laboratory
by assembling parts ofdead bodies and activating the creature with
electricity. 281.
Franklin, Benjamin: (1706-179°) American philosopher, diplomat
and scientist. In 1747, he began studying electricity and later became
famous for his kite experiment, in which he flew a homemade kite
during a thunderstorm and proved that lightning is electricity.
28o.
freight, slow: something that moves slowly. Freight, short forfreight
train, refers to a train that transports cargo, usually a much slower
train than those carrying passengers. 270.
fresh-caught: newly acquired, arrived or obtained, likened to fish that
are just caught. 408.
fret: to be anxious or worried. 344-
frigid: inhibited in the ability to experience sexual excitement during
sexual activity. 321.
frowning: contracting the brow, as an expression of concentration or
deep thought. "Frowning polysyllables" refers to the delivery oflarge
words (polysyllables) with a look of concentration or deep thought
in order to impress someone. 2.
full parade: the full show, displaying everything; complete in all
respects; including everything. This phrase alludes to the formal
parade in which soldiers, sailors or other military personnel march
in full dress uniform, complete in all details. 97.
furtherance: helping something to develop or to be successful;
advancement; assistance. 51.
fuse: figuratively, a device to protect against shock, overload, etc.
From the field of electricity, where in an electric circuit a strip of
573

DIANETICS: THE MODERN SCIENCE OF MENTAL HEALTH
easily melting metal is inserted, which melts (or "blows") and thus
interrupts the electrical flow to prevent damage should the electrical
current increase beyond a certain safe level. 67.
futility: lack ofusefulness or effectiveness; pointlessness. 178.
Galen: (ca. 129-200) Greek physician who believed that the liver
converted food into blood which then flowed into the rest ofthe
body and was absorbed. His undisputed authority in medicine
discouraged original research and inhibited medical progress until
the sixteenth century when British physician William Harvey
(1578-1657) discovered that blood circulated throughout the body
and was propelled by the heart, thus refuting Galen's theories.
156.
gallbladder: a pear-shaped muscular sac attached to the undersurface
ofthe liver, in which fluid produced by the liver and used in digestion
offats is stored and concentrated. Gallbladder trouble refers to the
formation ofsmall, hard masses in the gallbladder, causing pain and
difficulties with digestion offats. 235.
galvanometer: an instrument for measuring small electrical currents.
352.
gamut: the entire scale or range ofsomething. 126.
garners: gets or acquires; picks up or accumulates. 214-
Gaslight: a stage suspense thriller by English playwright and novelist
Patrick Hamilton (19°4-1962). In the play, a Victorian wife is
deliberately being driven insane by her murderous husband, who
is secretly searching for jewelry belonging to the wife's deceased
aunt (whom he murdered). His various schemes, such as dimming
the gaslights and pretending only his wife notices ("proving" she is
hallucinating) are obstructed when a suspicious detective discovers
the plan to kill the wife and the murder ofher aunt. 28I.
gasoline and alcohol: a reference to the mixing ofgasoline and alcohol.
As alcohol is cheaper than gasoline and can also be burned in a car
engine, attempts have been made to mix the two. However, alcohol
readilyabsorbs water directly from the air and when attempting to mix
alcohol with gasoline, this alcohol/water combination separates out
from the gasoline and can cause damage to the parts of an engine.
Thus, gasoline mixed with alcohol is considered harmful. 478.
574

EDITOR'S GLOSSARY OF WORDS, TERMS AND PHRASES
gauge: a standard measure or scale ofmeasurement such as for the
thickness or diameter ofan object. For instance, a piece of #12 gauge
copper wire is approximately the thickness of a wire coat hanger.
223.
Gauls: inhabitants ofan ancientregion in Western Europe consistingof
what is now mainly France and Belgium. The Gauls were conquered
by the Romans in the 50s B.C. 65.
gave (given) rise to: originated; produced; caused. 68-
Gay Nineties: in United States history, the period of the 1890s
remembered for its success and great wealth based on growth in
business and industry. Members ofthe expandingworkforce, hoping
for a betterlife in the cities, found instead long hours and unhealthful
working conditions in many businesses and factories. 224.
gem: something likened to or prized as a precious stone, because ofits
beauty or worth. Used sarcastically. 257.
genesis: the coming into being ofsomething; the initial stage of a
developmental process; origin. 299.
Genghis Khan: (ca. 1162-1227) Mongol conqueror who founded the
largest land empire in history and whose armies, known for their use
ofterror, conquered many territories and slaughtered the populations
of entire cities in the face of any resistance. 287.
geometric progression: a series ofnumbers, such as 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32,
64,128,256,512,1024, etc., where each number is multiplied by
a constant quantity (in this example, by 2), in order to arrive at the
next number. This results in each next number changing by greater
and greater amounts as the progression advances. 28.
germane: closely or significantly related; pertinent. 104.
gilded: covered with or as ifwith a thin layer ofgold. 21.
gimmick: a clever mechanism or object. 406.
girder: a large iron or steel beam used as a main supporting element
in building bridges and large buildings. 105.
gladhander: someone who greets or welcomes (everyone) warmly,
especially with an excessive or insincere appearance ofwarmth.
287.
glass snakes: referring to snake-like forms, such as heat waves seen
rising from a landscape during the heat ofthe day. 367.
575

DIANETICS: THE MODERN SCIENCE OF MENTAL HEALTH
gleaned: learned, discovered or found out, usually bit by bit orslowly.
274.
gnome: in folklore, any ofa race ofsmall, misshapen, dwarf-like beings,
supposed to dwell in the earth and guard its treasures. 39.
goad: to drive or urge on, as ifwith a sharp pointed stick used to drive
cattle. 318.
godhead: the state or quality ofbeing God or a god. 169.
golden rule: a rule ofethical conduct, usually phrased "Do unto others
as you would have them do unto you." 142.
gold-footed idol: a superior being without fault; someone who can do
no wrong. A figurative reference alluding to, and contrasting with,
the Biblical idol with head ofgold and feet ofclay, that is, something
that appearsstrong and admirable, but that will be destroyed because
ofan underlying weakness or fault. 422.
Goldi medicine man: medicine man ofthe Goldi people, traditionally
hunters and fishermen, who inhabit a valley in southeastern Siberia.
In the ceremonies oftheir medicine men, the drum is employed to
communicate with spirits. 7.
gold panning: washing (gravel, sand, etc.) in a pan in search ofgold.
376.
gonads: organs or glands that produce reproductive cells; sex glands.
301.
good sport: a sociable, pleasant person who agrees without complaint
to do what is asked by a companion. 436.
Goodwife: a tide ofrespect for a woman. 4°7-
gourd rattling: a reference to the use ofa rame by a medicine man for
the purpose offrightening demons away in religious rituals, etc. A
gourd is hard-shelled fruit ofvarious plahts whose dried shell is used
for musical instruments, utensils, etc. 204-
grammarians: those who are knowledgeable in grammar or in language
generally, such as its structure, spelling, etc. Also, more generally,
those who write on the basic elements or principles ofany science, art,
discipline or practice. Specificall}T, the reference here is to such words
as Absolt/,te Reality and T111th, where their capitalization (grammar)
transforms them from their usual meaning to something absolute
and without gradation ofmeaning. 4°5-

EDITOR'S GLOSSARY OF WORDS, TERMS AND PHRASES
Grand Coulee Dam: a dam on the Columbia River in Washington
State, USA. It is one ofthe largest concrete structures in the world
and a major source of electric power. 284.
green eyeshade: a type of headgear consisting of a strap to which
is attached a green colored beak or visor (shade) which prevents
light from directly hitting the eyes, such as from a bare light bulb.
Green eyeshades were traditionally associated with people working
hard at a task, such as newspaper editors, accountants, clerks, etc.
242.
gregarious: living in communities; given to association with others of
one's kind. 41.
grim: fierce, cruel, savage or harsh in state ofmind or action. 287.
grind it out: to work atsomething laboriously to bring it to a point or
state of extinction or depletion, etc. 351.
grippe: an infectious disease commonly called the flu. 363.
grist to one's mill: something that is to one's advantage or profit. Grist
is grain which is to be ground up. 403.
grizzly: a reference to a grizzly bear, a large brown bear of North
America. 137.
ground, giving: yielding to force or forceful argument; retreating.
218.
GROUPER: AN ENGRAM COMMAND WHICH MAKES THE TIME
TRACK OR INCIDENTS ON IT BECOME TANGLED IN SUCH A WAY
THAT THE TRACK APPEARS SHORTENED. (From Din1letics Tenns.)
262.
G-2: a designation for the military intelligence section ofthe United
States Anny or Marine Corps. 412.
guideposts: things that serve as guides; guidelines. 178.
guilt complex: in psychoanalysis, a complex is a set ofimpulses, ideas
and emotions that compel habitual patterns of behavior, in this case
causing the feeling of guilt. 329.
gunnery: the firing of heavy guns or projectiles. Used figuratively.
216.
gun was loaded, didn't know the: from a defensive statement used
to explain an accidental shooting which has come to mean an act
committed which has destructive consequences but with a lack of
foreknowledge, prediction or observation. 36.

577

DIANETICS: THE MODERN SCIENCE OF MENTAL HEALTH
gutted: that has had the contents (resources, goods, etc.) removed, as
by force. 488.
gyrations: motions in a circle or spiral; turning round, wheeling or
whirling. 219.
habit, riding: an outfit typically worn by a horseback rider, including
jacket, special pants that are wide at the hips and narrow around the
calves, and a hat with a round crown and a small visor. 427.
hallowed: regarded as holy. 348.
Hamlet: the central figure ofa tragedy ofthe same name by William
Shakespeare, first published in 1603. Wavering over whether to live
or die, Hamlet delivers the famous lines: "To be or not to be, that is
th . " e questIon... 225'
hand-patting: striking or clapping gentlywith the innersurface ofthe
fingers as an expression ofsympathy orsoothing. Used figurativel}',
showing sympathy for someone. 217.
hang fire: stall or delay. The phrase literally refers to the delayed
firing ofa gun that doesn't go offwhen the trigger is pulled or which
goes offlate. 295.
hardy: capable of enduring difficult conditions; sturdy and of good
health. 441.
harlot: a disreputable woman; a prostitute. 297.
harridan: a scolding, vicious woman. 421.
harrowing: extremely distressing or painful; disturbing. 455.
Harvey: William Harvey (1578-1657), English physician who, using
scientific procedures and experimentation, discovered that blood
circulates and that the heart propelsitthrough the body, thus refuting
the theories ofGalen. iv.
hash: 1. a dish made of cooked potatoes or other vegetables, usually
combined with chopped-up pieces of cooked meat and normally
reheated by frying until golden brown. 222.
2. a mess or jumble. 235.
hatfu1: a considerable quantity, from the amount that can be contained
in a hat. 333.
hatpin: a long, ornamental pin for fastening a woman's hat to her hair.
317.
havoc, (something) wreaks: causes or produces harm, damage, etc.
259.

EDITOR'S GLOSSARY OF WORDS, TERMS AND PHRASES

hawk: clear the throat noisily. 430.
hazarded: proposed as a guess. 11.
heads I win, tails you lose: I win whatever happens. From the phrase
helld(s) or tail(s), used in tossing a coin, where someone is asked
to announce which side ofthe coin will be facing up when it comes to
rest. If he is correct, he wins. Helld(s) is the side of a coin containing
the image ofa head and toiles) is the reverse side. 125.
hebephrenia: in psychiatry, a form of insanity characterized by
inappropriate reactions, such as excessive silliness. 146.
heed: give attention; have regard for. 309.
heed, pay no: give something no notice or consideration. 368.
Hegelian grammar: a reference to the correct usage ofcertain terms by
Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel (1770-1831), German philosopher
who determined that the world contained absolutes. Hegel's use of
language reflected this view. For example, in the use of the word
"accurate" and the omission of"very accurate" or "not quite accurate,"
the latter two being considered "bad grammar." 3.
held forth: spoken out (publicly) at length on a particular subject.
270.
helium: a very light colorless gas used to inflate balloons, airships, etc.
134.
Hercules: in ancient Greek and Roman mythologJr, a hero ofenormous
strength and courage who was commanded by a king to accomplish
twelve seemingly impossible tasks. 174.
heroic: having, displaying or characteristic ofthe qualities appropriate
to somebody who commits an act of remarkable bravery or who
has shown great courage, strength of character or other admirable
qualities (a hero); courageous. 210.
hew: make rough, heavy cutting blows, as with an ax. 463.
hexed: affected as ifby an evil spell. 176.
high flown: being high above the ordinary level ofthought. 41.
hinder: prevent or make it difficult for something to happen; stop.
219.
Hindu: ofor related to Hi1zdu;sm, a religion ofIndia that emphasizes
freedom from the material world through purification ofdesires and
elimination ofpersonal identity. Hindu beliefs include reincarnation.
The sacred writings ofHinduism include the Veda. 103.
579

DIANETICS: THE MODERN SCIENCE OF MENTAL HEALTH
Hindu trinity: a reference to the three great gods in Hinduism:
Brahma, the creator ofthe universe; Vishnu, the preserver ofthe
universe; and Shiva, who personifies both the destructive and the
procreative forces ofthe universe. A trinity is a combination or set
ofthree individual things (as gods, persons, things, etc.) that form a
unity or are closely connected to one another. 419.
Hippocrates: (ca. 460-377 B.C.) Greek physician known as the "father
ofmedicine" and famous for his medical writings including an oath
which served as a model for the ethical practice ofmedicine. 309.
histamine: a substance released in the body in response to an allergy;
it helps the body fight infections by increasing the supply ofblood
and other fluids to affected areas, but it also produces uncomfortable
reactions such as sneezing, watery eyes, runny no~e, itching and
swelling of body tissues. 111.
hitherto: up to this time; until now. ii.
HOLDER: ANY ENGRAM COMMAND WHICH MAKES AN INDIVIDUAL
REMAIN IN AN ENGRAM KNOWINGLY OR UNKNOWINGLY. (From
DUl7letics Terms.) 245.
hole in his head, like a fellow needs a: to emphatically have no need
for something. Literally it means, needs something in the same way
as (like) a person needs an actual hole in his head. 118.
hormones: chemical substances secreted by glands or tissues in the
body that regulate growth and development, control the function
of various tissues, support reproductive functions, and regulate
metabolism (the process used to break down food to create energy).
117.
hub: a center around which other things revolve or from which they
radiate; source. 195.
hubbub: confusion or uproar. 453.
Hume: David Hume (1711-1776), Scottish philosopher who believed
that all human thought and knowledgewas based on direct experience
ofthe world through the senses and who attempted to analyze the
workings ofthe mind to show this. 10+
hurrah's nest: a state ofconfusion or disorder; a chaotic heap or mess;
a disorderly mass. 376.

580

EDITOR'S GLOSSARY OF WORDS, TERMS AND PHRASES
hyacinth, buy white: a reference to a line ofpoetry byAmerican writer
James Terry White (1845-1920) which reads: "Ifthou offortune
be bereft/And in thy store there be but left/Two loaves-sell one,
and with the dole/Buy hyacinths to feed thy soul." (Bereft means
deprived or stripped of. Dole means a small portion. Hyacinths are
plants having fragrant clusters of bell-shaped flowers in different
shades.) 39.
hydraulic ram: a ram operated by liquid pressure, such as water. A1"Inn
is any ofvarious devices for battering, crushing, driving or forcing
something. 304.
hyoscine: a drug used as a sedative or hypnotic. 433.
hypnoanalysis: a method of psychoanalysis in which a patient is
hypnotized in an attempt to reach analytic data and early emotional
reactions. 150.
hypnoscopes: instruments used to determine whether a person is a
hypnotic subject, such as a hollow magnet that is said to cause a
person certain "sensations" when placed on their finger ifthey are
a "good" hypnotic subject. 280.
hypochondriac: one who suffers excessive anxiety over his health,
often with imaginary illnesses. 71.
"I": (in philosophy and other fields) the source ofthinking; the person
himself, as distinct from the body, who is aware of being self; the
soul. vii.
idealism: the cherishing or pursuit of high or noble principles,
purposes, goals, etc. 483.
identities: exactsamenesses in qualities or characteristics; equivalents
or equals. 50.
identity-thought: the type ofthought ofthe reactive mind. It thinks in
terms offull identification, which is to sayidentities, one thing identical
to another. This can be stated as everything equals everything,
or A=A=A=A=A. The analytical mind thinks in differences and
similarities. The better one can tell differences, no matter how
minute, and know the width ofthose differences, the more rational
he is. The less one can tell differences and the closer one comes to
thinking in identities, the less sane he is. 79.

581

DIANETICS: THE MODERN SCIENCE OF MENTAL HEALTH
ideologies: systems of ideas, doctrines, opinions, etc., or ways of
thinking ofan individual, class, etc., especially as a basis ofeconomic
or political theories orsystems. 486.
idiosyncrasy: a characteristic, habit, mannerism or the like that is
peculiar to an individual. 22.
idyllic: serenely beautiful; untroubled and happy. 40.
ilk: kind, sort or class. 119.
imagery: the fonnation ofmental images, figures or likeness ofthings,
or ofsuch images collectivel)'. 18.
impacted: pressed tightly together, as a tooth wedged between the
jawbone and another tooth and unable to emerge properly because
ofits abnormal position, lack ofspace, etc. 140.
impaction: the action of becoming packed in, firmly fixed, dammed
up. 100.
impasses: points or situations, etc., from which further progress is
blocked; difficulties without solution; literally referring to a road
that has no exit. 449.
impedimenta: things that impede or hinder one's progress. 246.
impetus: driving force or motive; impulse. 37.
implicitly: without reservation, question or doubt. 421.
imponderables: thingsthat cannot be figured out orsolved by thinking.
283.
imposition: an excessive, unwarranted or uncalled-for requirement or
burden. 490.
incapacitation: incapability of normal activity; the act of making
something incapable or unfit. 85.
incidence: the occurrence, rate or frequency of a disease, crime or
something else undesirable. 165.
incidental: happening in an unplanned or unpredictable way, along
with something else. 16.
incident to: naturally accompanying or pertaining to. 61.
incongruity: something that is not consistent with other factors of a
situation. 271.
incontrovertible: not open to question or dispute; undeniable. 461.
index system: a method of sequential arrangement of material,
extremely detailed, by alphabetical listing ofnames, places, subjects,
etc., or by specific categories, dates, times, events, etc. 242.
582

EDITOR'S GLOSSARY OF WORDS, TERMS AND PHRASES
Indian rope trick: a magic trick, Oriental in origin, in which a magician
suspends a rope in midairwhich a person climbs up and then seemingly
disappears. 1°4.
indictment: any charge, accusation or serious criticism. 8.
indifferent: 1. rather poor or bad; not good at all. 33.
2. neither good nor bad; average; mediocre. 472.
indoctrinate: instruct in a principle, procedure, subject, etc.; teach.
345.
indolence: laziness and inactivity; a tendency to avoid exertion. 290.
inductive: of or concerned with reaching a conclusion based on
observation (of facts, phenomena, etc.). 64.
indulgence: yielding to or satisfying desires, feelings, etc. S0.
indulges: gives way to, allows; gives oneselfup to. 217.
inextricably: beyond all possibility ofbeing disentangled. 27.
infame: infamy, the disgrace to somebody's reputation caused by a
dishonorable act or behavior. 437.
inherently: in a manner that is existing in someone's or something's
internal character as a permanent and inseparable element, quality
or attribute. ix.
injudiciously: unwisely or in a manner lacking judgment. 470.
injunction(s): 1. an earnest warning. 72.
2. an emphatic order or command. 463.
in kind: with the same thing; in something ofthe same kind or in the
same way as that received or borne. 21.
inorganic: not belonging to the body or its parts (such as its organs)
or physical things. i.
in re: with regard to; concerning. 326.
insensible: incapable of perceiving through the senses or the mind.
391.
insidious: operating or proceeding in an inconspicuous or seemingly
harmless way but actually with grave effect. 300.
instanter: instantly; at once, immediately. 369.
instrument: a reference to any ofvarious instruments or tools used in
childbirth, such as scissors, clamps, syringes, etc. 364.
insufferable: difficult or impossible to endure; intolerable. 325.
insulin shock: a form of psychiatric shock treatment introduced in
the 19305. The purported treatment consists of a series ofshots,

DIANETICS: THE MODERN SCIENCE OF MENTAL HEALTH
injecting an excessive amount of insulin into the body, thereby
inducing convulsions and a coma. 238.
intelligence officer: a military officer responsible for collecting and
processing information (such as on hostile forces) especially through
secret means. 57.
intent: something planned or the purpose that accompanies a plan.
48.
intent, for all: for all practical purposes. 302.
intent on: with full attention concentrated or focused on one thing.
61.
in the stead of: in the place of a person or thing as occupied by a
successor or substitute. ,.
intimate: to suggest or hint thatsomething is a certain way. 81.
intimation: something suggested or implied. 17.
introversion: a directing of one's interest inward or to things within
the self. 447.
intuitive: known directly and instinctively, without being discovered
or consciously perceived. 30.
inversion: a reversal of position; a change to the opposite state or
condition. 246.
invoked: called forth; caused. 373.
involved: included in or participating in something as a necessary
element, condition or circumstance, as in "no Nirvana involved. "
116.
IQ.: Intelligence Quotient, a number arrived at by tests and intended to
indicate a person'sintelligence. (Quotient meansthe result ofdivision,
and refers to the way the test is calculated to obtain the average for
the age group.) 110.
irksome: annoying; irritating; exasperating. 261.
irresolution: wavering in decision as to a course of action. 65.
Ism: a distinctive doctrine, theory, system or practice. 486.
jauntings: journeys or trips, especially short ones, normally thought
of as for pleasure. 183.
jeers: remarks expressing contempt orscorn. 418.
jettison: throwaway, reject, get rid of(an obstacle or burden). 204.
Jimmie the Cob: a made-up name for a leader of a gang of criminals.
Cob is a British term for leader or chief. 180.

EDITOR'S GLOSSARY OF WORDS, TERMS AND PHRASES
jockeying: skillfully managing for the purpose ofgaining an advantage.
486.
jocular: joking; humorous. 410.
josded: pushed or bumped against roughly. 355.
jub-jub bird: an imaginary bird, noted for its ferocious nature, created
by and appearing in the works of English author Lewis Carroll
(1832-1898). 235.
Junior: 1. amale child;son, asin "AskJuniorto help youwith that." 159.
2. younger (usually designating the younger oftwo men bearing the
same full name, as a son named after his father). 257.
jurisprudence: the science or philosophy of law; the systematic
knowledge of the laws, customs and rights of men in a state or
community necessary for the due administration ofjustice. 481.
Keats:John Keats (1795-1821), English poet whose works are known
for their dignity, melody and rich imagery. 382.
keep, dungeon: the main inner tower ofa medieval casde thatserved
as the living place for a lord and his family and which was used as the
final defensive stronghold when the casde was under siege. 428.
key, brought it into: activated, as if operating a key, a small manual
device for opening, closing orswitching electronic contacts. 291.
keyed-in: literally, a key is a small manual device for opening, closing
or switching electronic contacts. Key-in is used here to describe a
dormant engram that has activated and is now thrown into circuit.
79.
keynote: the central or most important point or theme ofsomething.
37.
key-out: literally, a key is a small manual device for opening, closing
orswitching electronic contacts. Key-out is used here to describe the
action ofengrams being deactivated and going out ofcircuit. 184.
kinetic: pertaining to motion. 75.
Kinsey: Alfred Charles Kinsey (1894-1956), American biologist who
investigated human sexual behavior, interviewed some 18,000 people,
and published his fmdings in 1948 and 1953. 257.
kinship: relationship; close connection. 487.
kleptomaniac: someone with an obsessive urge to steal, especially
when there is no economic necessity. 260.

DIANETICS: THE MODERN SCIENCE OF MENTAL HEALTH
Knighthood Was in FIO'lIJtr, When: title of a novel by Charles Major
(1856-1913) that captured the chivalry (courteous conduct) of
twelfth- and thirteenth-century England when knights were at their
height offame and prominence. 217.
Knowable and Unknowable of Herbert Spencer: a reference to the
philosophy ofHerbert Spencer (1820-19°3), English philosopher
known for his application ofthe scientific doctrines ofevolution to
philosophy and ethics. Spencer claimed that knowledge was oftwo
kinds: (1) knowledge gained by the individual, and (2) knowledge
gained by the race. He also believed that there is a basic and final
reality beyond our knowledge, which he called the "Unknowable."
103.
Korzybski: Alfred Korzybski (1879-195°), Polish-American scholar
and founder ofgeneral semantics, a highly organized philosophical
approach to language. Korzybski believed the imprecise use
of language affected human behavior (people react mentally
and physically to the meaning of words), causing confusion and
miscommunication among people. Korzybski believed that the
fundamental to thinking was the ability to distinguish and that the
literal identification ofone thing with another (when in fact it was
not identical) is what causes difficulties and even insanity in Man.
77.
Kraepelin: Emil Kraepelin (1856-1926), German psychiatrist who
developed a classification system for mental illness. Page4SS.
Krafft-Ebing: Baron Richard von Krafft-Ebing (1840-1902), German
psychiatrist and author ofworks on sexual deviations. 125.
laid in(to): set, placed or deposited (in or into); placed in position
(inside something). 61.
lash-ups: the actions of being tied up with ropes, cords, etc. Here,
used to describe how the circuits ofthe mind ordinarily intended for
smooth, rapid computation are tied up or caught up with parasitic
demons. 110.
last-ditch: made, done, etc., in a fmal, often desperate, act ofresistance
or opposition. 134.
late: at a time period in or near the present time. viii.
Law ofAffinity: the Law ofAffinity might be interpreted as the Law
ofCohesion (a force that binds or unites). Deprivation ofor absence
586

EDITOR'S GLOSSARY OF WORDS, TERMS AND PHRASES
ofaffection could be considered as a violation ofthe Law ofAffinity.
Man must be in affinity with Man to survive. 103.
lead (off): to guide or channel something (away). 287.
leads: literally, flexible electrical conductors, used to connect two
pointsin an electrical path. Used here to describe mental connections.
26+
leaf: a sheet of paper or in a book; also the written or printed
matter on it. By extension, an event orsequence ofevents worthy of
being written and recorded, as in the pages ofhistory. 112.
leprosy: an infectious skin and nerve disease characterized by white
scaly scabs, deformities and the eventual loss ofsensation. 164.
Lesbos: a mountainous Greek island in the Aegean Sea, offthe coast
ofTurkey. 288.
Leucippus: Greek philosopher (fourth century B.C.) who believed
that all matter was made up of atoms, that all observable properties
of an object result from the behavior ofthese atoms, and that this
behavior of atoms was completely determined in advance. He held
that everything came about for a reason and by necessity. 37.
leveled: aimed or directed at or towards. 125.
lichens: gray, green or yellow plants appearing in often flat patches
on rocks and other surfaces. 36.
lick: overcome or defeat. 376.
lieu of, in: in place of; instead of. 105.
light of, in the: with the help given by knowledge of (some fact);
taking into account; considering. 59.
line: a series ofindividual things (such as bodies) following one after
the other, as "in the physicalline. "119.
line of demarcation: that which marks the boundaries or limits of, or
dividessomething so that its divided parts are separate and identifiable.
25.
liner: a large ship for passengers, mail, cargo, etc., especially one on a
regular route. 406.
lisp: pronounce or speak with a lisp, a speech defect consisting in
pronouncing sand z like or nearly like the th sounds ofthin and this.
450.
"little men hanging by their heels": see "two little men ... hanging by
their heels."

DIANETICS: THE MODERN SCIENCE OF MENTAL HEALTH
live-fuse: ofor like a lit fuse or explosive. Afilse is a cord ofmaterial
that burns easily, lit at one end to carry a flame along its length to
set off an explosive at the other end. 115.
10: look! see! Used to call attention to something. 241.
lobe(s): a rounded projection or subdivision of an organ ofthe body.
55.
Locke:]ohn Locke (1632-17°4), English writer, philosopher and
political theorist who argued that the human mind is a "blank slate"
at birth until experience begins to "write" on it. He believed that one
can know nothing unless it has been part ofone's experience. 104.
locomotion: the action ofmoving from one place to another. 86.
logbook: a book in which details of a trip made by a ship or aircraft
are recorded. 408.
logjam(s): an immovable pileup of logs causing blockage in a river.
292.
looms up: rises into view as something massive, impressive or of
importance. 429.
loop: someone who is crazy or nutty. 225.
loopy: a slang term meaning crazy or nutty. 302.
lordly: acting toward others as though one is better or more important
than they are. 214-
Lorentz-FitzGerald-Einstein equations: a reference to the equations
of Hendrik Lorentz (1853-1928) and George Francis FitzGerald
(1851-19°1)who concluded that a moving body exhibits a contraction
orshrinking in the direction ofits motion by an amount that depends
on how closely it approaches the speed oflight. These findings later
contributed to the work ofAlbert Einstein (1879-1955). 3.
o o Direction of Motion
Low Speeds Approaching
Speed of Light

lot, carload: a carload is the amount carried by a railroad freight car.
Lot refers to numerous articles forming a group that is regarded
or handled as one item. Hence, used figuratively in this context,
588

EDITOR'S GLOSSARY OF WORDS, TERMS AND PHRASES
a carload lot means a large quantity ofitems viewed as being grouped
together, as ifin the space ofa railroad freight car. 405.
loud: offensively bright. 14.
loused-up: made (someone or something) worse rather than better.
115.
love name: an additional, informal name used affectionately, as when
speaking to a child. 394.
Lucretius: (ca. 98-55 B.C.) Roman poet and author ofthe unfinished
instructional poem On the Nature o/Things, published in six volumes,
which sets forth in outline a complete science ofthe universe. 35.
lugubrious: extremely dismal or gloomy, especially in a slow, serious
or ridiculous manner. 93.
Lysol: a brand name for a liquid disinfectant. 126.
Macbeth: the title character of a play by William Shakespeare.
Macbeth meets three witches who predict that he will be king of
Scotland but that his descendants will not hold the throne. Macbeth
secures and holds the throne through multiple murders but fails to
change the remainder ofthe prediction and is killed in battle. His
wife and accomplice, crazed with remorse, also dies. 328.
maelstrom: a large, powerful or violent whirlpool; hence a restless,
disordered state of affairs. 181.
magic healing crystal: a type of crystal considered to have the power
to heal, as isfound among certain primitive medicine men in Australia
who are said to believe that healing crystals were placed on Earth by
gods ofthe sky. e'y.ftatis a transparent rock-like substance resembling
ice. 7.
makeshifts: temporary substitutes. 70.
makes shift: temporarily substitutes something of an inferior kind or
uses inferior means. 7.
malady: an illness, condition or situation that is problematic and
requires a remedy. 71.
malaria: an infectious disease transmitted by the bite of infected
mosquitoes, common in hot countries and characterized by severe
chills and fever. If not treated it can cause death. 188.
malignant: (ofa tumor) characterized by uncontrolled growth. 114.
maligned: spoken harmfully or untruthfully about; spoken evil of.
64.

DIANETICS: THE MODERN SCIENCE OF MENTAL HEALTH
mammoths: large extinct mammalsrelated to the elephant, that had hair
and long curved tusks, existed mainly in the Northern Hemisphere
and died out more than 10,000 years ago. 35.
Man: the human race or species; humankind; Mankind. ii.
man: 1. a human being, without regard to sex or age; a person. ii.
2. any ofthe pieces used in a board game, such as chess or checkers.
261.
mandate: an order or command. 28.
mange: an infectious skin disease ofanimals, and sometimes humans,
resulting in hair loss, scabs and itching. 83.
manic: 1. a manic engram, a highly complimentary pro-survival
engram. Ifan individual is caughtin a manic, hislife force is channeling
straight through the engram and his behavior, no matter how
enthusiastic or euphoric, is actually very aberrated, as in "Itmay even
be amanic and that's horrible despite its apparent 'ettphoria. '" 119.
2. a phrase in a manic engram, such as "Ifit added, 'He is a darling
and a very wonderwith the ladies, ' it would then be apro-survival with a
manic." 292.
manic: 1. characterized by mania, abnormal excitability, exaggerated
feelings ofwell-being, etc., as in "Thiswould be a manic-type insanity."
71.
2. a person characterized by mania, as in "as in the manic and the
bigh-ettphoria case. "286.
manic-depressive: a person alternating between extremes ofexcitement
and depression. 66.
march: a steady forward movement or progression. 260.
marionette: a puppet manipulated from above by strings attached to
its jointed limbs. v.
marketplace: the everyday world. 149.
masochistic: marked by pleasure gained (sometimes sexual) from pain,
degradation, etc., inflicted or imposed on oneself, either as a result
ofone's own actions or the actions ofothers. 323.
master disc: the original (master) of a phonograph record, made out of
metal and used to make duplicate phonograph records (flatvinyl discs
with grooves, on which music, voice or other sounds are recorded).
The master disc has a series of grooves and when impressed upon

EDITOR'S GLOSSARY OF WORDS, TERMS AND PHRASES
hot, softened vinyl, these grooves are duplicated so the phonograph
record contains a copy ofthe original sound. 156.

Master Disc

Phonograph Record

Matterhorn: a famous mountain peak in the Alps rising 14,692 feet
(4,478 meters). It is located on the border of Switzerland and Italy.
39.
mauled (around): handled or dealt with in a rough manner. 203.
mauling: rough or careless handling. 165.
Mauser: the name of a German military rifle, from the last name of
the inventor, Peter Paul Mauser (1838-1914). 138.
maw: anything that seems like a gaping hole that devours things or
people. 39.
mawkish: filled with sickly sentimentality; weakly emotional. 330.
Maxwell,James Clerk: (1831-1879) Scottish physicistand mathematician
who in 1864 described the relationship between electricity and
magnetism and whose work laid the foundation for later advances in
the use of electricity. 86.
Mazda and Ahriman: Ahura Mazda, the supreme deity and creator of
all things in Zoroastrianism (an ancient religion ofIran) and Ahril1Uln,
an evil spirit and arch rival ofthe deity Mazda. 419.
measure, in a: to some extent or degree. 173.
mechanical: 1. concerned with orinvolving material objects or physical
conditions or forces, as in "which handlesall the l1techanicalfunctions of
1" " "lvlng. 60.
2. of or relating to l1lechanics, the procedural or operating details
(ofsomething). When applied to theories, l1techanics means the
explanation of phenomena by the assumption ofmechanical action;

DIANETICS: THE MODERN SCIENCE OF MENTAL HEALTH
the explanation ofhow something works, as in "that is a mechanical,
scientificfaet. " 463.
mechanical processes: processes that operate with definite, specific
actions, producing an unvarying result; processes whose actions can
be explained by the assumption of mechanical actions or of how
something works. 230.
mechanics: the procedural or operating details (ofsomething). When
applied to theories, mechanics means the explanation of phenomena
by the assumption of mechanical action; the explanation of how
something works. 90.
mechanism(s): 1. a structure orsystem (ofparts, components, etc.) that
together perform a particular function as would occur in a machine,
as in "gazesforthefir.rt time upon the mechanisms ofhuman action" or "a
man contained a mechanism which recordedwith diabolical accuracy. "
Pageix.
2. the agency or means by which an effect is produced or a purpose
is accomplished, likened to the structure or system of parts in a
mechanical device for carrying outsome function or doing something,
as in "he is the optimum sttrvival mechanism which life has attained. "
26.
mechanistic: ofor penaining to a l1lechanimz, a structure orsystem (of
parts, components, etc.) that together perform a particular function
as would occur in a machine. vi.
media-media: a coined term used to mean average or regular;
intermediate or halfway. Media is from a Latin word meaning middle.
129.
medium: a substance or the environment in which an organism
naturally lives or grows. 191.
melancholy: sadness and depression ofspirits; tendency to be sad,
gloomy or depressed. 146.
mellerdrammer: a humorous variation ofmelodrama, a dramatic piece
characterized by exaggerated emotions and sensational incidents.
224.
MEMORY: ANYTHING WHICH, PERCEIVED, IS FILED IN THE
STANDARD MEMORY BANK AND CAN BE RECALLED BY THE
ANALYTICAL MIND. (From Ditmetics Terms.) v.

EDITOR'S GLOSSARY OF WORDS, TERMS AND PHRASES
men of goodwill: people (irrespective of sex or age) who are
well-wishing and have a desire to do good to others. 205.
Mesmer, Anton: (1734-1815) Austrian physician who pioneered the
practice ofhypnotism in medicine. 308.
metal, in the: a coined term for in reality or as something actually
exists, such as the metal instruments and equipment on a ship.
408.
metallurgy: the technique or science ofworking or heating metals so
as to give them certain desired shapes or properties. 489.
metaphysician: a person who specializes or is versed in metaphysics.
See also metaphysics. 405.
metaphysics: the branch of philosophy concerned with the ultimate
nature of existence or the nature ofultimate reality that is above or
goes beyond the laws ofnature oris more than physical. First applied
to writings ofAristotle (384-322 B.C.), the term literally means "after
physics," as these writings followed his works entitled The Physics.
ii.
meted: dealt out. 167.
metering: 1.supplying (a fluid) in a measured or regulated amount.
51.
2. measuring or recording the quantity or quality ofsomething.
300.
midterm: the midpoint or approximate midpoint of a period oftime.
8.
mien: a person's appearance, bearing or posture, especially facial
expressions, as an indication ofmood or character. 129.
militate: to operate or work against, or have a substantial effect or
influence on something, especially a negative one. 26.
millennia: the plural form of mille1lll;u,m, a period of 1,000 years.
103.
millwheel pond: a pond that drives the machinery of a mill through
the force ofmoving water. (A millis a building equipped to grind or
crush solid substances.) 284.
mind: listen to and obey someone. 372.
mind's eye: the ability to imagine or remember images or scenes, to
"see" things with the mind; the ability ofseeing a mental vision
593

DIANETICS: THE MODERN SCIENCE OF MENTAL HEALTH
consisting of an imaginary or recollected sight, as opposed to one
actually seen at the time. 19.
mirage: something that falsely appears to be real. Literally, a mirage is
an optical illusion of a sheet ofwater appearing in the desert or on
a hot road, caused by light being distorted by alternate layers ofhot
and cool air. 292.
mirror, crazy house: a reference to a mirror built to give a distorted
image, found in an amusementpark fun house (an attraction consisting
ofa series ofrooms and passages, sloping or moving floors, distorting
mirrors and other devices designed to surprise or amuse). 360.
mirth: joyfulness, gaiety or merriment, especiallywhen characterized
by laughter. 146.
misconstrued: misunderstood as to the meaning; taken in the wrong
sense. 299.
MISDIRECTOR: ANY ENGRAM COMMAND WHICH MAKES THE
PATIENT MOVE IN A WAY OR DIRECTION ON THE TRACK WHICH
IS CONTRARY TO INSTRUCTIONS OF THE AUDITOR OR THE
DESIRES OF THE ANALYTICAL MIND OF THE PATIENT. (From
Dinnet;cs Terms.) 262.
mocked: treated someone with ridicule or contempt. 448.
molars: large back teeth in humans used for chewing and grinding.
141.
Moloch: a god worshiped throughout the countries of the ancient
Middle East and to whom violent child sacrifices were supposed to
have been made. 409.
mongrel: ofmixed race, origin, character, nationality, etc. 168.
monitor: a device or system that supervises, regulates, controls or
directs the performance ofsomething. 55.
monkey wrenches: wrenches with one movable jaw, adjusted by a
screw to fit various sizes of a nut, etc. 317.
monocell: an organism composed ofa single cell. 156.
monologuist: a person who delivers monologue, a drama in which a
single actor speaks alone. Used here to mean speaks to oneself.
255.
monomanic: characterized by monoma1lin, such concentration on a
single object or idea as to suggest mental derangement. 287.
594

EDITOR'S GLOSSARY OF WORDS, TERMS AND PHRASES
monotone: characterized by an uninterrupted sameness, due to
complete lack ofdistinction in emphasis, importance, quality, etc.
Literally, a monotone is a vocal utterance or series ofspeech sounds
in one unvaried tone. 15.
monstrosity(ies): 1. a person that is abnormally developed, formed
contrary to the ordinary course of nature; deformed. 194.
2. an excessively bad or shocking example. 419.
moored: fixed firmly; secured. 77.
Moralist: a teacher orstudent ofmorals; a thinker or writer concerned
with moral principles and problems, specifically any ofthe Christian
Moralists ofthe Middle Ages (fifth through fourteenth centuries).
In their writings, the Moralists dictated that a person should follow
certain virtues (qualities ofgoodness) in determining whether actions
are right or wrong, good or evil, and that evil people deserved an
unhappy life. 23.
mores: heavily agreed-upon, policed codes of conduct of a society.
161.
morning sickness: nausea and vomiting sometimes accompanied by
dizziness, headache, etc., that affects some women during the first
months of pregnancy. 191.
moronic: marked by extreme deficiency in judgment or sense. 94.
morose: gloomy; depressed; sour-tempered. 224-
morphine: a powerful drug used in medicine to relieve severe pain;
prolonged use can lead to addiction. The name comesfrom Morpheus,
the Roman god ofsleep and dreams. 434.
mother ofinvention: from the saying "necessity is the mother of
invention" which means that an urgent need often prompts one to
work out a new solution. 37.
motif: a dominant idea or theme. 225.
motor: of, pertaining to or involving muscular movement. v.
motor strip: a long narrow area of the brain, which is believed to
control the movement of the various muscles and movements of
the body. Motor means of, relating to, or being a nerve that passes
from the nervous system to a muscle, conducting an impulse that
causes movement. (See text for further description.) See also "two
little men ... hanging by their heels." 352.
mulled over: thought about carefully; considered at length. 86.
595

DIANETICS: THE MODERN SCIENCE OF MENTAL HEALTH
multitudinously: in many numerous ways. 57.
mumbo jumbo: complicated and sometimes purposeless activity or
language intended to obscure; also meaningless talk; nonsense.
240.
mutates: undergoes mutation. See mutation. 123.
mutation: a sudden structural change in the hereditary material ofan
organism's cells resulting in a new trait or characteristic not found
in the parents, as distinguished from a variation resulting from
generations ofgradual change. Hereditary means having to do with
traits or characteristics transmitted from generation to generation
through reproduction. 26.
myelin sheathing: a whitish material thatsurrounds some nerve cells
and that aids transmission ofnerve impulses. Priorto 1950, prevailing
theory held that the human child wasincapable ofrecordingmemory
until the formation ofmyelin sheathing after birth. ix.
myopia: defective vision ofdistant objects; nearsightedness. 65'
mysticism: the belief that personal communication or union with
truth or the divine (God, gods or goddesses) is achieved through
direct perception or sudden insight rather than through rational
thought. ii.
Napoleon: Napoleon Bonaparte (1769-1821), French general who
crowned himself emperor ofFrance in 1804. His constant wars to
expand French territory left the country smaller than before he
took power, with a half a million men dead. The statement that he
reduced the height of Frenchmen one inch refers to his action of
placing French military personnel who were tall (whereas he was
short) in dangerous situations where they were more likely to be
killed. 45.
narcosynthesis: hypnotism brought about by drugs whereby a patient
undergoes psychotherapy while affected by such drugs and in a
"deep sleep." Narco is short for narcotic and means a drug that
produces hypnosis. Synthesisin this sense means the combination of
separate elements ofsensation orthoughtinto awhole. The name was
created by psychiatrists using drugs duringWorld War II attempting
to "rebuild (synthesize) the disintegrated or broken-down" soldier.
142.

EDITOR'S GLOSSARY OF WORDS, TERMS AND PHRASES
Nation, Carrie: (1846-1911) American reformer who advocated
avoidance ofalcoholic drinks. She was famous for raiding saloons and
demolishing bottles ofliquor and barroom furniture with a hatchet.
224.
natural history: a branch of knowledge embracing the study,
description and classification of natural objects such as animals,
plants and minerals. 3°4-
naturalist: a person who studies nature, especially by direct observation
of animals and plants. 27.
natural selection: the process by which fonns oflife having traits that
better enable them to adapt to specific environmental pressures,
such as predators, changes in dimate, competition for food or mates,
will tend to survive and reproduce in greater numbers than others
oftheir kind, thus ensuring the survival ofthose favorable traits in
succeeding generations. Apredato1· is an animal that hunts, kills and
eats other animals to survive, or any other organism that behaves in
a similar manner. 123.
Nature: the creative and regulative physical power which is conceived
of as operating in the material world and as the immediate cause of
all ofits phenomena. Often represented as having human qualities
or character, i.e., Mother Nature. ix.
nature ofthe beast: the essential character or inherent qualities of a
thing, person, etc. Nature meansthe innate orinseparable combination
of properties something has that give it its fundamental character.
Beast means a thing or person of a particular kind. 453.
naught: nothing. 484.
nebulosity: a faint and indistinct glow, as from an inner source oflight.
134.
nebulously: in a hazy, vague, indistinct or confused manner. 14.
nebulous, the: the formless matter supposed to have existed before
the creation ofthe universe, characterized as hazy, vague, lacking
definite fonn or feature. From a Latin word nebula, meaning a mist,
vapor or cloud. 35.
necessity level: the degree to which an individual feels the need or
necessity to take a certain course of action. 135.
negate: deny the truth, existence or fact (ofsomething). 182.
negotiated: moved through or over in a satisfactory manner. 490.
597

DIANETICS: THE MODERN SCIENCE OF MENTAL HEALTH
neologism: a recently coined word or a recently extended meaning of
an existing word. 16.
nerve failed you, your: a variation of lost your nerve, lost one's
confidence, courage or control. Failed means having lost one's power
orstrength, or broken down under power orstrength ofopposition.
Neroe refers to one's courage, coolness and firmness of mind in
dangerous circumstances. 343.
neurology: the scientific study or knowledge ofthe anatom}', functions
and diseases ofthe nerves and the nervous system. 18.
neuron: a cell that transmits nerve impulses and is the basic functional
unit ofthe nervous system; also called nerve cell. 8S'
neuroses: plural ofneurosis, an emotional state containing conflicts and
emotional data inhibiting the abilities or welfare ofthe individual.
9.
neurosurgeon: one who practices surgery on any part ofthe nervous
system, including the brain. 8.
Newton: Sir Isaac Newton (1642-1727), English scientist and
mathematician whose discoveries and theories about the laws of
gravitation and motion laid the foundation for much ofthe scientific
progresssince his time. 9.
nick oftime, in the: just before it is too late; just before something
bad happens. The word nick is from an obsolete definition meaning
the critical moment. 300.
Nineveh: the oldest and most populous city (ca. 700 B.C.) ofthe ancient
Assyrian empire (now northern Iraq). It had an elaborate system of
canals and aqueducts, wide streets, gardens and palaces and a wall
some 7.5 miles (12 kilometers) in circumference surrounding it.
170.
Nirvana: the goal ofthe Hindus. Hindu beliefs are that "Reality is
One" (Brahma) and that ultimate salvation, and release from the
endless cycle of birth to death, is achieved when one merges or is
absorbed into the "one divine reality," with all loss of individual
existence. 116.
nitrous oxide: a sweet-smelling, sweet-tasting gas used in dentistry
and surgery to render the patient unconscious. 139.
nomenclature: a set or system of names or terms, as those used in a
particular science or art. 2.

EDITOR'S GLOSSARY OF WORDS, TERMS AND PHRASES
nostalgic: characterized by nostalgia, a mixed feeling of happiness,
sadness and longing when recalling a person, place or event from the
past or the past in general. From Greek no.rtos, a returning home and
algos, pain. 87.
nowise, in: in no way, manner or degree. 330.
nurses: keeps a feeling in the mind or heart for a long time and allows
it to grow or deepen. 369.
nymphomaniac: affected with nymphomania, abnormally excessive
and uncontrollable sexual desire in a woman. 330.
object of chase: something that is attacked or hunted, such as an
animal or bird that is hunted by Man or by another animal for food.
37.
oblivion: the state or condition ofbeing forgotten or unknown. 39.
obscure: 1. not easily understood. 15.
2. not well-known to many people. 149.
3. indistinctly or imperfectly felt; not clearly perceived by the senses.
225.
obstetrical: pertaining to the care and treatment of women in
childbirth and during the period before and after delivery.
434.
obtain: to be in force or effect; prevail. 472.
obviate: to do away with or prevent by effective measures. 27.
occasioned: brought about or caused something. 16.
ocularly: relating to the eyes or eyesight. 16.
odor: (of good or bad) repute, favor or estimation. 33.
offhand: 1. without previous thought or preparation. 204-
2. so casual or informal as to appear impolite or uncaring. 389.
ogreish: resembling or characteristic of an ogre, a man-eating monster
in folklore and fairy tales, usually represented as a hideous giant.
127.
Old Man ofthe Sea: a character in the story ofSinbad the Sailor, the
Old Man ofthe Sea (a sea god) forces Sinbad to carry him on his
shoulders for days until Sinbad gets the old man so drunk he falls off.
The phrase has come to mean an intolerable, heavy burden that is
hard or impossible to get rid of. 171.
old school tie: a tie of characteristic pattern worn by former students
ofa particularschool, especially an English school. The term is used
599

DIANETICS: THE MODERN SCIENCE OF MENTAL HEALTH
figuratively to denote the wearer ofsuch a tie and the behavior and
attitudes usually associated with those wearing such a tie, especially
conservatism and group loyalty. 87.
olfactory: ofor pertaining to the sense ofsmell; used in smelling.
18.
Olympian: characteristic ofMOlmt Olympus, the highest mountain in
Greece, believed to be the horne ofthe gods. 40.
omnipresent: present in all places at the same time. 293.
operate: do something; perform a work or labor. Used in this context
with a double meaning (as an example ofa statement in an engram)
ofperform surgery on a person. 391.
opium: an addictive drug prepared from the juice of a poppy (a plant
with large red, orange or white flowers). 433.
opossum playing: pretending to be dead, ill, asleep, unaware, etc. An
opossum is a small, tree-dwelling American animal that is active at
night and habitually pretends death when endangered. 426.
opportunism: the art, policy or practice of taking advantage of
opportunity or circumstances, especially with little regard for
principles or ultimate consequences. 37.
orangewood stick: a slender, rounded stickwith tapered ends ofhard,
fine-grained wood from the orange tree, used for manicuring the
nails. 297.
order of, on the: resembling to some extent; like. ii.
organic: ofor belonging to the body or body parts. vii.
organic sensation: the condition of the organism (or organs in the
body) during the moment ofthe engram. 14.
organ ofthought: the brain. 87.
ornamented: furnished with ornaments, accessories, articles or details
used to beautify the appearance ofsomething to which itis added or of
which it is a part, as in "the most l1tagnificent/y ornamented civilization. "
8.
orthopedics: the branch of medicine dealing with the treatment of
deformities, diseases and injuries ofthe bones, joints, muscles, etc.
112.
ovum: a female reproductive cell. 87.
pagan: characterized by the worship ofmany gods, as in the religions
ofthe ancient Romans and Greeks. 34-
600

EDITOR'S GLOSSARY OF WORDS, TERMS AND PHRASES
pain-drive theory: the psychological practice of inflicting pain,
deprivation (the action of removing or withholding something
from the enjoyment or possession ofsomeone) or other unpleasant
consequences on an individual to make them avoid what is considered
by the practitioner undesirable action or behavior. 40.
pallid: lacking sparkle or liveliness; dull. 15.
palm off: cause (something) to be accepted as genuine, true, etc., by
trickery; impose (a thing) fraudulently (on or upon a person). 385.
palsy: muscular inability to move part or all ofthe body, sometimes
accompanied by involuntary tremors ofthe limbs. 161.
panacea: a remedy for all ills or difficulties. 328.
pandering: doing everything another wants, often to get some
advantage for oneself. 182.
parable: a simple story illustrating or teaching a truth, moral lesson,
etc. 181.
paragon: (said ofa person or thing) a model ofexcellence or perfection
ofa kind. 422.
paralytic stroke: a blockage of a blood vessel to the brain causing
inadequate oxygen supply, leading to paralysis ofparts ofthe body.
441.
paranoid-schizophrenic: a person suffering from schizophrenia and
in whom hallucinations, delusions ofgreatness, magnificence, etc.,
or delusions of persecution are prominent. See also schizophrenic.
71.
parathyroid: I. a reference to the hormone secreted by the parathyroid
gland. 117.
2. the parathyroid gland, consisting offour tiny glands that function
as one gland. These glands lie in the front ofthe neck close to the
thyroid gland. The parathyroid secretes a substance (hormone)
into the blood that helps regulate the amount of calcium and other
minerals in the body. These minerals are necessary for a number of
important body processes, including bone growth and muscle and
nerve function. 121.
parcheesi: a board game played by four or less people where the
movement ofpieces along a track composed ofsquares is determined
by throws ofdice. 261.

601

DIANETICS: THE MODERN SCIENCE OF MENTAL HEALTH
paresis: psychosis caused by widespread destruction of brain tissue
occurring in some cases ofsyphilis(a serious disease thatis transmitted
sexually). 238.
parlor: a room in a house used primarily for receiving and entertaining
guests. 72.
par, on a: on an equal level with. 184.
passes ofthe hand: in hypnotism, the actions ofmoving the hand over
or along the body of a subject, supposedly resulting in a hypnotic
state. 73.
Pasteur: Louis Pasteur (1822-1895), French chemist who in the late
1800s formulated the germ theory ofdisease, that disease was spread by
germs attacking the body. He was noted for his discovery that the
desired production ofalcohol in the process offermentation is indeed
due to yeast(a smallsingle-celled organism). He found thatwine turns
bitter because of germs that enter the wine while it is being made
and showed these germs can be killed by applying controlled heat.
This became known as pasteurization and was also applied to killing
the germs in milk. (Fermentation is a chemical process that breaks
down organic materials, such as when the microscopic organism
yeast breaks down sugar into alcohol and carbon dioxide gas.) ix.
Pasteurella pestis: the name for the bacteria that causes bubonic plague.
See also bubonic plague. 36.
pat: so easily and readily produced as to suggest lack ofproper thought.
409.
paternity: the fact orstate of being the father of a child. 428.
pathologically: through or by disease. 10.
pathology: 1. the science or study ofthe causes and nature ofdisease.
112.
2. any condition that is a deviation from the normal healthy condition,
such as a disease. 112.
patter: 1. what someone says; talk or chatter. 222.
2. talk, discussion or speech associated with a particular situation,
group of persons or profession. 457.
paunch: a large and protruding belly. 259.
Pavlov: Ivan Petrovich Pavlov (1849-1936), Russian physiologist, noted
for his dog experiments. Pavlov presented food to a dog while he

602

EDITOR'S GLOSSARY OF WORDS, TERMS AND PHRASES
sounded a bell. After repeating this procedure several times, the dog
(in anticipation) would salivate at the sound ofthe bell, whether or
not food was presented. Pavlov concluded that all acquired habits,
even the higher mental activity ofMan, depended on conditioned
reflexes. Aconditioned reflex is a response (for example, secretion of
saliva in a dog) brought about by a secondary stimulus (for example,
the ringing of a bell) repeatedly associated with an original stimulus
(for example, the sight ofmeat). 175.
pedantic: things that show unnecessary stress on minor or trivial
points oflearning, displaying a scholarship lacking in judgment or
sense of proportion. 2.
penal codes: a body oflaws dealing with various crimes or offenses
and their legal penalties. 481.
Penates: in ancient Roman religious belief, the gods of a household or
state. 7.
pendulum, Aristotle's: Greek philosopher Aristotle's principle which
states that there is no middle ground and that something is either
true or false, yes or no, is or is not the same as something else. 240.
penicillin: a powerful drug used to treat infections and serious diseases
caused by bacteria. 163.
penis envy: in psychoanalysis, the supposed hidden, unexpressed
longing by a female for a penis, leading to feelings of inferiority.
155.
peptic ulcer: a sore formed on the lining ofthe stomach or adjacent
organs due to secretion of excess digestive acid, sometimes causing
chronic stomach pain. Peptic means pertaining to or associated with
digestion. 111.
PERCEPTIC: ANY SENSE MESSAGE SUCH AS A SIGHT, SOUND, SMELL,
ETC. (From Di07letics Terms.) 16.
percepts: impressions or mental results of perceiving by the senses;
things that are perceived. 57.
permanent leads: literally, leads are flexible electrical conductors
which connect two points in an electrical path and used here to
describe mental connections. "Pennanent leads" refer to the apparent
soldered-in nature of engrams which cannot be thrown out by the
analyzer except through Dianetics techniques. 264.

6°3

DIANETICS: THE MODERN SCIENCE OF MENTAL HEALTH
personal pronouns: pronouns that show by their form whether they
refer to the person speaking, such as "I" in I shall eat; the person
spoken to, such as "you" in yott work hard; or the person or thing
spoken of, such as "he" in he iswalking. Apronoun is used in place of
a noun, such as "he" instead ofJoe. 84.
persuasion: a method oftreating something, consisting essentially in
rational conversation and re-education. 111.
phenobarbital: a bitter crystalline acid used as a sedative, hypnotic
and anticonvulsant. An anticonvulsant counteracts violent muscular
contractions. 433.
phlebotomy: the act or practice ofopening a vein to let "impure" or
"extra" blood out ofthe body as a therapeutic measure. From Greek
phleho, vein, and tomos, cutting. 119.
phonograph record: a vinyl disc (normally 12 inchesin diameter) with
grooves (indentations) in it, on which music, voice or other sounds
are recorded. A needle is lowered upon the disc which is spinning
on a rotating, round table. The needle fits in the grooves of the
record and transfers the sound recorded in the grooves to speakers
for playback. x.
photosynthesis: the process by which green plants and certain other
organisms use the energy oflight to convert carbon dioxide and
water into food. 195.
physics: the science that deals with matter, energy, motion and force,
including what these things are, why they behave as they do and the
relationship between them. i.
piece: a product of creative work, such as a theatrical production. See
also villain of the (this) piece. 60.
pilloried: held up to public contempt, ridicule or scorn. 64.
pilot: something which leads, guides or conducts, as through unknown
places, etc. 87.
pine tar: a thick sticky brown to black substance obtained from pine
wood, with a distinct odor and used in paints and varnishes. 19.
Pittsburgh stogies: long, thin, roughly made and inexpensive cigars
from the city of Pittsburgh, in southwest Pennsylvania, USA.
423.

EDITOR'S GLOSSARY OF WORDS, TERMS AND PHRASES
pituitrin: a reference to the hormones produced by the pituita1' gland,
a small gland about the size of a pea lying under the brain near the
center of the skull. The pituitary gland secretes hormones that
control or influence a wide range ofbodily functions, including the
activities of certain other glands. 117.
placate: make someone less angry or hostile, usually by doing orsaying
things to please him or her. 372.
plane: a level of existence, consciousness or development. iii.
plankton: a collection ofsmall microscopic organisms, including algae,
that float or drift in great numbers in fresh or salt water at or near
the surface and serve as food for fish and other larger organisms.
36.
platitudes: dull, unoriginal or empty statements on a moral theme,
especially those expressed as if they were important or helpful.
333.
Plato: (427-347 B.C.) Greek philosopher noted for his works on law,
mathematics, philosophy and natural science. Plato believed that
artists and poets do not create because they possess some special
knowledge but rather they are seized by irrational inspiration, a sort
of"divine madness." ix.
polarity: that quality or condition in a physical body or system that
manifests opposite or contrasting properties, as in a magnetwhere one
end is positive and the other negative. Hence, opposite or different
polarity would be the condition of having opposite properties or
powers from something else. 246.
polysyllables: words consisting ofseveral (poly), especially four or
more syllables, a word or part of a word pronounced with a single
sounding ofthe voice. For example:simplicity (sim plic i ty). "Frowning
polysyllables" refers to the large words sometimes employed by those
who act very learned and serious. 2.
ponderous: of grave importance, seriousness, weightiness (used
figuratively) and unpleasantly dull. 27.
portal: a doorway or gateway that is large or elaborate in construction;
the entrance, with the immediately surrounding parts ofa building,
church, etc. Hence poetical1~ a "door" or "gate"; a means ofentrance.
vii.

DIANETICS: THE MODERN SCIENCE OF MENTAL I-IEALTH
portends: forecasts, predicts. 44.
positive suggestion(s): in hypnosis, a suggestion or command which
is given to a hypnotized subject who then obeys it unknowingly.
Also, any phrase or command in the mind acting like one given to a
hypnotized person. 69.
post, left at the: left way behind. Post refers to the pole on a racetrack
marking the point where a race starts. 107.
postnatally: during the time period after birth; especially ofthe period
immediately after birth. 174.
postulates: things that are suggested or assumed to be true as a basis
for reasoning. 3.
poultices: hot, soft, moist masses, as of flour, herbs, mustard, etc.,
sometimes spread on cloths, applied to sore or inflamed parts ofthe
body. 4°7.
preamble: an introductory statement, fact, event, etc.; a preliminary.
31+
precedent: a previous instance or case which is or may be taken as an
example or rule for subsequent cases, or by which some similar act
or circumstance may be supported or justified. 156.
precepts: rules, instructions or principles that guide somebody's
actions, especially ones that guide moral behavior. 279.
PRECLEAR: ANY PERSON WHO HAS BEEN ENTERED INTO DIANETIC
THERAPY. (From DiolletiCS Terms.) 124.
predisposition: a condition which renders its possessor inclined or
liable to disease, illness, etc. 80.
prefrontal lobes: lobes situated at the front or forepart ofthe brain. A
lobe is a roundish projection or subdivision of an organ ofthe bod~
55.
prefrontal lobotomy: a psychiatric operation carried out by boring
holes into the skull, entering the brain and severing the nerve
pathways in the two frontal lobes, resulting in the patient becoming
an emotional vegetable. 119.
PRERELEASE: ANY PATIENT WHO IS ENTERED INTO THERAPY
TO ACCOMPLISH A RELEASE FROM HIS CHIEF DIFFICULTIES,
PSYCHOSOMATIC OR ABERRATIONAL. (From Di01letics Terms.) 216.
prescience: knowledge ofthings before they exist or happen. 104.
606

EDITOR'S GLOSSARY OF WORDS, TERMS AND PHRASES
press agentry: promotion or publicity. A p1-ess agent is a person
employed to promote the interests of an individual, organization,
etc., by obtaining favorable publicity through news stories, mentions
in columns, events and the like. 116.
prestige: standing or estimation in the eyes of others; influence;
reputation. 411.
presumable: capable of being taken for granted; entitled to belief
without examination or direct evidence. Hence, something that is
assumed to be correct or workable without close inspection. ix.
pre-term: before the end ofthe normal period ofpregnancy. 331.
pretty: inventive, cleverly made or originated. 276.
prevarication: the act ofspeaking falsely or misleadingly; deliberately
misstating or creating an incorrect impression; lying. 234-
priesthood: a group ofpeople who claim or obtain special and exclusive
knowledge, understandingor power in a specific field or area. 167.
prize: (in describing undesirable qualities) outstanding of its kind;
unrivaled. 412.
processed: put through the steps ofan official procedure for purposes
ofregistration or examination, prior to the beginning or end of a
period ofmilitary service. Page458.
profusion: a great quantity or amount. vii.
progeny: children, descendants or offspring considered as a group or
collectively. 44-
prompts: reminds someone about something that they have forgotten;
provides or supplies information to help someone remember
something. 349.
propitiation: a low emotion below anger and close to apathy.
Propitiation is the act oftrying to please or satisfy someone in a way
calculated to win their favor in order to defend or protect oneself
against their disapproval, attack, etc. 370.
proposition: something proposed or offered for consideration,
acceptance or adoption. 63-
propriety, soul of: somebody who is a perfect example ofsocially
correct and appropriate behavior. Soul here means a person who
perfectly represents some quality or attribute. 258.

DIANETICS: THE MODERN SCIENCE OF MENTAL I-IEALTH
protoplasm: the colorless, jelly-like liquid that is present in the cells
of all living plants, animals and humans and consists ofthe living
matter of plant and animal cells. 74.
province: the range of one's proper duties and functions; sphere or
field of activity or authority. 434.
provisos: conditions, qualifications or limitations. 463.
prowess: exceptional or superior skill, strength, braver}', etc. 288.
pseudo-: a word combined with other words to mean "false" or
"pretended." Also, apparently similar to (a specified thing) as in
pseudo-nurse, psettdo-l1tother, pseudo-father, etc. 141.
psyche: the mind. 64.
psychic: ofor pertaining to the human mind; mental. 1+
psychometry: testing of individuals to find out their intelligence,
aptitude, various personality traits, etc. 377.
psychoses: conflicts of commands which seriously reduce the
individual's ability to solve his problems in his environment to a
point where he cannot adjust himself to some vital phase of his
environmental needs. xi.
PSYCHOSOMATIC: ANY PHYSICAL DISORDER OR ILL GENERATED
BY THE BODY ITSELF. (From Difl1let;cs Terms.) i.
pucker: to draw or gather a part ofthe face into wrinkles or irregular
folds, as in worry puckered his brow. 239.
pull chain: a chain which operates a mechanism when pulled, such as
to turn a light on or off. 42+
pull the cord: the action ofpulling on a light cord, a cord which hangs
from a ceiling or lamp stand and operates an electric light. 91.
punishment complex: in psychoanalysis, a complex is a set ofimpulses,
ideas and emotions that compel habitual patterns ofbehavior, in this
case causing the action ofpunishment. 98.
punk: an offensive term for a young man regarded as worthless, lazy
or arrogant. 395.
punk water: a reference to sPt1nk Wllter, rainwater that collectsin hollow
tree stumps, popularly thought to be a remedy, especially for warts.
407.
puns: words used in such a way as to suggest two or more meanings or
different associations, or two or more words ofthe same or nearly
the same sound with different meanings. 242.
608

EDITOR'S GLOSSARY OF WORDS, TERMS AND PHRASES
puristic: characterized by puri.f1n, rigid adherence to or insistence
upon purity or correctness, especially in language or style. 3.
pygmy: a small person; one small in size, capacity or power. 170.
pyramiding: increasing at a steady and progressive rate. 486.
pyrites: a shiny compound of iron and sulfur, found in many places
and often mistaken for gold and sometimes called "fool's gold." The
name pyrite comes from the Greek word for fire. 376.
Q quantity: a factor or agency that is not named or is of an unknown
identity. 435.
qualm: a feeling of uneasiness about a point of conscience or the
correctness of an action. 420.
quarters: 1. living spaces. 8.
2. a particular but unspecified person, group of people or area.
287.
quibbles: argues or objects over small or minor matters. 420.
quick-change artist: a performer or other person who is skilled at
changing quickly from one costume or character to the next. 100.
quinine: a bitter.tasting drug used to relieve pain and fevers and once
the only drug treatment available for malaria. 386.
quivering: having a light, rapid motion; vibrating, as something alive
might do. 39.
racial: concerning all Mankind; the human race. 34.
rack(s): a framework of bars, wires or pegs on which articles are
arranged or deposited. Used figuratively. 57.
racks: causes to suffer trouble, stress, anxiet~ etc. 377.
radar sight: the ability of an individual to "see" things in remote
locations, as radars do. A radar is an electronic device designed to
detect or identify remote objects by sending out radio waves and
measuring the time for the radio wave to return to the sending device.
38;.
railroad tie: any ofthe parallel crossbeams to which the rails ofa train
track are fastened. 32.
rainbow chasing: following after something that is pointless; from
the old story that a pot ofgold can be dug up by anyone reaching the
end ofa rainbow, where it touches the earth. 385.
raise havoc: cause widespread dalnage, destruction or disruptive chaos.
283.

DIANETICS: THE MODERN SCIENCE OF MENTAL HEALTH
rake over (something): to examine something that happened in the
past in great detail. 174.
ranges: moves or passes, as if by traveling along or through an area.
353.
rapport: a harmonious relationship in which the people concerned
understand each other and communicate well. 375.
REACTIVE MIND: THE CELLULAR-LEVEL MIND WHICH IS NOT
"UNCONSCIOUS" BUT IS ALWAYS CONSCIOUS-THE HIDDEN
MIND, HITHERTO UNKNOWN. (From Dianetics Terms.) iv.
read (largely) into: introduce an additional idea or element or
significance into something, frequently implying that the insertion
is unwarranted or erroneous. 37.
realized: presented or brought before the mind with vividness and
clarity. 14.
realm: any sphere or region. 1.
recalcitrant: resisting control; defying authority or guidance. 471.
recesses: concealed or inner areas or parts ofsomething. 168.
recession: a condition of an incident being out ofsight after several
recountings, as in "on engrom to/ked into recession." 267.
recession: 1. a diminishing or declining in terms ofprosperity, artistic
and technical skills and learning (as from the virtual disappearance
ofthe knowledge ofthe previous Greek and Roman civilizations
during the Dark Ages). 34.
2. the action offalling back, declining, in character, value or amount,
as in "the potient experienced0 recessi01Z ofallsomatics. " 154.
record: a vinyl disc (normally 12 inches in diameter) with grooves
(indentations) in it, on which music, voice or other sounds are
recorded. A needle is lowered upon the disc which is spinning on a
rotating, round table. The needle fits in the grooves ofthe record and
transfers the sound recorded in the grooves to speakers for playback.
Pagex.
recount: tell someone aboutsomething; give a description ofan event
or experience. 152.
recoup: regain or recover. 137.
recourse to: the act orinstance ofturning to something for aid, use or
help. 10.
recriminative: bringing counter-accusations against a person. )29.
610

EDITOR'S GLOSSARY OF WORDS, TERMS AND PHRASES
recruited: increased in natural population as the offspring grow and
become members. 86.
red herring: something that draws attention away from the central issue;
literally, a smoked herring (a small food fish ofthe North Atlantic)
having a reddish color. The phrase derives from the use ofsuch fish
to distract hunting dogs from the trail. 469.
REDUCE: TO RENDER AN ENGRAM FREE FROM SOMATIC OR
EMOTION BY RECOUNTINGS. (From Dimleties Terms.) 235.
redwood: a giant tree, native to California and Oregon, remains
ofwhich existed between 180 million and 135 million years ago.
Redwoods are among the oldest and largest of living things, some
reaching over 2,000 years of age and with heights of 350 feet (106.68
meters) and trunk diameters ofas much as 30 feet (9.14 meters). 36.
refined: 1. free from crudeness or coarseness; cultivated; elegant.
74.
2. made finer, purer and more precise. 480.
regressive: 1. ofor pertaining to returning in one's mind to an earlier
period or stage oflife as a result ofmental illness. xi.
2. moving back into a worse condition; declining. 161.
re-improved: brought into a more desirable, valuable or excellent
condition again. 489.
RELEASE: ANY PERSON WHO HAS BEEN ADVANCED TO A STATE
APPROXIMATING 1950 NORMAL BY DIANETIC THERAPY,
WHETHER ADVANCED FROM A PSYCHOTIC OR NEUROTIC
CONDITION. THE ACT OF RELEASING BY THERAPY. (From Dill1letirs
Terms.) i.
remonstrated: stated or pleaded in protest, objection or disapproval.
448.
remorseless: marked by a continuation without lessening in strength
or intensity; characteristic ofsomething that never stops or that is
impossible to stop. 484.
Renaissance: the period in European history from the early 1300s to
the 1600s marked by a revival of art, literature and learning. During
this period, many scholars and artists rejected the culture ofthe Dark
Ages and recaptured the spirit ofthe Greeks and Romans in their
own artistic works. Renaissance is from a Latin word for "reborn."
34.

611

DIANETICS: THE MODERN SCIENCE OF MENTAL HEALTH
render: cause to be or become; make. v.
repression(s): the actions, processes or results ofsuppressing into the
unconscious or keeping out ofthe conscious mind unacceptable
memories or desires. 9.
resilient: able to recover quickl}', from illness, injury, mental pain, etc.
178.
resolute: motivated byor displaying determination and purposefulness.
422.
resounding: expressed in a rich, full or impressive manner. 2.
restimulation: a condition in which an approximation ofthe reactive
mind's content orsome part thereofis perceived in the environment
ofthe organism. 80.
resultant: something occurring as a result or following as a consequence.
166.
resumption: the act or an instance ofpicking something back up again
or continuing with something, as after a temporary stop; to resume.
471.
retribution: punishment caused or inflicted for evil done. 378.
retroactive: extending in scope or effect to matters which have
occurred in the past. 311.
return to the womb: a reference to the psychiatric theory that people
have a hidden desire to return to the "safety" and "comfort" ofthe
womb. 159.
reverie: a light state of "concentration" not to be confused with
hypnosis; in reverie the person is fully aware ofwhat is taking place
in the present. vii.
reviled: criticized in an abusive or angrily insulting manner. 175.
rheostat: a device that operates in an electric circuit to gradually
increase or decrease the flow of current, as with lights that can be
varied in brightness. 281.
rheumatic fever: a serious disease characterized by fever, swelling
and pain in the joints, and a sore throat, and frequently resulting in
permanent damage to the valves ofthe heart. 396.
riding habit: an outfit typically worn by a horseback rider, including
jacket, special pants that are wide at the hips and narrow around the
calves, and a hat with a round crown and a small visor. 427.
612

EDITOR'S GLOSSARY OF WORDS, TERMS AND PH RASES
Rights ofMan: a reference to any document or legislation (law) that
might be drawn up to serve as a guarantee ofbasic rights ofindividuals,
the principles ofhuman Iibe~ etc. 423.
Rohmer, Sax: pen name of British writer Arthur Sarsfield Ward
(1883?-1959), creator ofthe mysterious Dr. Fu Manchu. Rohmer
portrayed the famed criminal genius in a series ofnovels published
between 1913 and 1959. Dr. Fu's plots often failed as he employed
female spies who fell in love with the wrong man. 126.
roll: figuratively, an indication to start something moving or into
action. Roll means to begin, commence, to put into operation. The
word is used in the movie industry as an order from a director or
an assistant director to start the camera and sound equipment into
action. 338.
roller-coaster: with reference to a situation or condition characterized
by sudden, extreme and often repeated changes, or persistent or
violent ups and downs, as one fluctuating between conflict and
harmony or great happiness and despair. The term comes from an
amusement park, where a roller coaster is a train with open cars that
moves along a high, sharply winding track built with steep inclines
that produce sudden, speedy plunges for thrill-seeking passengers.
93.
Ross, Ronald: (1857-1932) British physician noted for establishing
the connection between mosquitoes and malaria. 188.
Rousseau,Jean Jacques: (1712-1778) French writer and influential
political philosopher whose best-known theory was the "natural
man," a beliefthat Man was essentially good and equal in his natural
state but had been corrupted by civilization. He proposed "spiritual
refreshment" for Man through a return to nature. 42.
running down: to search out and locate the moment ofreception of a
somatic. 276.
running out: exhausting the negative influence ofsomething; erasing.
444.
running sore(s): a painful open skin infection (a sore) that is
discharging pus (a yellowish fluid consisting ofthe liquid part of
blood plus dead cells, bacteria, etc.). 122.
run off: same as run 011t, meaning to exhaust the negative influence
ofsomething; to erase. 470.

61 3

DIANETICS: THE MODERN SCIENCE OF MENTAL HEALTH
sack race: a race in which contestants have their legs restricted in a
sack and move by jumping. 134.
sadism: a type ofbehavior in which pleasure is obtained from hurting
others and making them suffer physically or mentally. 125.
sag: lower in tone; also, sink down or decline, as from a higher to a
lower emotional state. 136.
sakes, keeps as: keeps things for the memories they call to mind. From
the term keepsakes. A keepsake is a small item kept in memory ofthe
person who gave it or originally owned it. 42 3.
salvoed: fired on, with several guns all at once. Used figuratively.
214.
sanitaria: plural ofsanitarium, an institution for the treatment and
recuperation ofthe mentally ill or those with chronic illnesses. 7.
sarcastic: characterized by words that mean the opposite ofwhat they
seem to say and make fun oforinsultsomething orsomeone. 350.
scalding: a getting burned or injured by hot liquid or steam. 349.
scaly: covered or partially covered with scales, thin flakes ofshedding
skin. 306.
scant: barely sufficient or adequate. 20.
scent: perceive by the mind. 294-
schizophrenic: a person with two (or more) apparent personalities.
Schizophrenia means "scissors" or "two," plus "head." Literally,
splitting ofthe mind, hence, split personality. 66.
scholarly: ofor having to do with scholars, those who have a great deal
ofknowledge in a particular branch ofleaming, especially in the field
ofliterature or philosophy; those who have engaged in advanced
study and acquired detailed knowledge in some special field and who
engage in the analysis and interpretation ofsuch knowledge. 479.
Scholastic: a person involved in Scholasticism, a system ofChristian
thought extending from the beginning of the ninth century to
the latter part of the fifteenth century (end of the Middle Ages).
Scholasticism was an effort to coordinate and bring into alignment
the religious beliefs ofChristian faith with philosophic reason and
thus to give a rational content to and deeper understanding ofthat
faith. In so doing, Scholastics discussed and wrote aboutsuch matters
as Man's relationship to God, evil, sin, etc. 23.

EDITOR'S GLOSSARY OF WORDS, TERMS AND PHRASES
Schopenhauer: Arthur Schopenhauer (1788-1860), German
philosopher known for his philosophy of pessimism who believed
that the will to live is the fundamental reality and that this will, being
a constant striving, cannot be satisfied and only causes suffering.
129.
science: knowledge; comprehension or understanding of facts or
principles, classified and made available in work, life or the search
for truth. A science is a connected body of demonstrated truths or
observed facts systematically organized and bound together under
general laws. It includes trustworthy methods for the discovery of
new truth within its domain and denotes the application ofscientific
methodsin fields ofstudy previously considered open only to theories
based on subjective, historical or undemonstrable, abstract criteria.
The word science is used in thissense - the mostfundamental meaning
and tradition of the word- and not in the sense of the physical or
l1taterial sciences. i.
science of(mind): in such uses as .fcie1lce ofaf"t, science ofmind, the
application ofscientific methodsin fields ofstudyformerly considered
open only to theories based on opinion or abstract data which cannot
be proven or demonstrated. i.
scores: a great many. From the word score, meaning twenty. 152.
script: a series of(changing) events, actions, dialogues, likened to the
written text of a play, film, etc. 362.
seared: burned, charred or scorched (as from electric shock). 210.
secret: a reason or explanation not immediately or generally apparent;
answer. The parathyroid secretes a hormone which in turn controls
the concentration of calcium in the blood. Hence, the parathyroid
contains the answer as to how the concentration of calcium in the
blood is maintained. 121.
secret service: a branch or department of a government, such as the
Secret Service in the United States, whose duty it is to protect the
president or head ofstate. 71.
sedately: in a quiet and rather dignified manner. 367.
semantic: of, pertaining to or arising from the different meanings of
words or othersymbols; ofor relating to meaning in language. 58.
seminal: ofor pertaining to semen, the impregnating fluid ofmen and
male animals. 126.

61 5

DIANETICS: THE MODERN SCIENCE OF MENTAL HEALTH
sensory strip: a long narrow area ofthe brain, which is believed to
monitorthe senses ofthe body such assight,smell, touch and hearing.
Sensory means connected with the reception and transmission of
sense impressions. (See text for further description.) See also "two
little men ... hanging by their heels." 352.
Sententious, Dr.: a made-up name. Sententious means inclined to state
wise sayings and to often make judgments about moral questions.
407.
sentient: conscious or capable ofperceptions; consciously perceiving.
21.
sentry: one who or something which keeps guard or watches over
something, like a military sentry, a soldier stationed to keep watch
over something or to control access to a place. 215.
seven, sometimes one gets a: a reference to a game of chance called
craps, a game in which two dice are thrown and in which a first throw
of 7 (or 11) wins, a first throw of 2, 3 or 12 loses, and a first throw
of4, 5, 6, 8, 9 or 10 can be won only by throwing the same number
again before throwing a 7. Ifhe throws a 7 he is unsuccessful (craps
out). 119.
sextant: a tool used by navigators to determine the position ofthe stars.
From the Latin sextant, sixth part, so called because the instrument's
arc is a sixth ofa circle. 408.
shadow-stuff: st'ujfissomething regarded as an unspecified substance
or material. Shaduw-st'lIjfis that which has the nature ofa shadow, an
unreal appearance or image. 293.
Shakespeare: William Shakespeare (1564-1616), English dramatist
and poet, considered the greatest playwright of all time. Several
passages of his plays include reference to the fact that the heart
controls the function of blood circulation. IS6.
shaman: a priest or priestess who is said to relay messages between the
natural and supernatural worlds and to use magic to cure ailments,
predict the future and to contact and control spiritual forces. One
technique for the cure ofthe sick involved singing special songs and
blowing tobacco smoke over the person, as tobacco was believed to
have magical powers. 7.
sheer: the most complete and utter (used to emphasize the unlimited
extent ofsomething). 236.
616

EDITOR'S GLOSSARY OF WORDS, TERMS AND PHRASES
shifty: having, displaying or suggestive of deceitful character; tricky.
77.
shocky: affected with shock (a state ofreduced mental awareness and
physical functioning due to the effects of an impact, injury, drug,
etc.). 359.
shooting dice: in a game of chance called craps, throwing a pair of
dice. See also seven, sometimes one gets a. 119.
short shrift: litde attention or consideration in dealing with a matter.
104-
shoulder to the wheel, put a: set to work vigorously;strive energetically
toward achieving an objective. 168.
side, on the (condition specified): rather more than less; tending
toward (the quality or condition specified). For example, saying
someone is "on the whiny side" means that they tend to spend a lot of
their time whining or complaining. 258.
signal: remarkable; notable. 22.
Simple Simon: a reference to the children's story which tells of a
young boy whose mother instructs him to "Watch out when you go
outside to play. I've got six pies cooling on the doorstep and you be
careful how you step on those pies." Taking his mother's directions
literally, the boy goes out onto the porch and steps, very carefully,
right in the middle of each pie. 140.
sinusitis: an inflammation ofa sinus or the sinuses (any ofthe hollow
cavities in the skull connecting with the nasal cavities). 65.
Sioux: a group ofNative American peoples inhabiting the northern
plains ofNorth America, now mainly living in the north central part
ofthe United States. 309.
situation: place or location. 160.
skills: acquires the ability, as by knowledge, practice, etc., to do
something; trains. 60.
Sky is no limit, the: a variation and intensification ofthe phrase, the
sky'sthe limit, meaning there is no limit to whatsomebody can achieve,
do, earn, etc. 204.
sleigh: a child's sled, a small vehicle consisting of a platform mounted
on runners, for coasting down snow-covered hills. 239.
slice: a figurative use ofslice, as in a fragment, sliver or piece, meaning
an aspect or form of. 184.

DfANETICS: THE MODERN SCIENCE OF MENTAL HEALTH
slight: treat as ofsmall importance or with indifference; pay little or
no attention to; to disregard. 420.
slip(s) ofthe tongue: a mistake in speaking, unintentionally made.
66.
slog: work hard for long hours. 235.
slogging: working steadily and carefully for long hours. 217.
slow freight: something that moves slowly. Freight, short for freight
train, refers to a train that transports cargo, usually a much slower
train than those carrying passengers. 270.
slumber: be in a state ofinactivity. 454.
slurs: insulting remarks. 125.
smooths: changes the facial expression to one that is pleasant, calm or
peaceful, as in "she smooths herface." 332.
snake pit: among primitive peoples, a large pit containing poisonous
snakes into which victims are thrown for execution or as a test
of endurance. Used figuratively to mean an intensely chaotic or
disagreeable place or situation. 413.
snarl up: complicate or confuse, mess up. 217.
SO and so: in a certain but unspecified manner or way, as in "what it
was in the engram which affected him so and so. "473.
soapbox: describing one who makes informal, often impassioned
speeches to street audiences from any improvised platform (such as
a soapbox). 396.
society: companionship or association with one's fellows; friendly or
intimate connection. 76.
Socrates: (ca. 470-399 B.C.) Greek philosopher, said to believe in a
"demon" (meaning here, an inner voice). The demon supposedly
forbade Socrates to do things, but never gave any positive
encouragement, only predictions of good or bad luck, or cautions
when he was about to make an incorrect decision. 65.
sodium pentothal: a substance used as a general anesthetic and in
psychotherapy as a hypnotic. 150.
sodomy: anal or oral intercourse with amember ofthe same or opposite
sex. 323.
soldered: fastened with solder, any of various metals that melt at
low temperatures and which when heated will flow into a joint
between metal parts to unite them. Soldering is used in electronics
618

EDITOR'S GLOSSARY OF WORDS, TERMS AND PHRASES
to firmly unite two parts so that electricity will flow between them.
Hence, joined, fastened or cemented (to something). 96.
solemnity: marked by serious or dignified feeling, character or
appearance. 475.
solicitous: anxious or concerned. 193.
SOMATIC: DIANETIC NEOLOGISM FOR PAIN, ANY BODY CONDITION
EXPERIENCED WHEN CONTACTING AN ENGRAM; THE PAIN OF
A PSYCHOSOMATIC ILLNESS. (From D;fl1let;cs Terms.) 20.
somatic strip: in Dianetics, a mechanism of the mind that locates
moments of time for the individual. It is under the orders ofthe
auditor and under such orders can relocate incidents. In the field of
medicine, it is what is known as a motor strip and sensory strip, two
strips ofthe brain that are thought to control motorfunction (physical
movement) and sensory function. Since Dianetics does not depend
on structural discoveries or conclusions and since it is not firmly
established that these strips in the brain perform such functions, the
term somatic strip is used in Dianetics to describe the function ofwhat
the medical field calls motor and sensory strips. See alro "two little
men ... hanging by their heels." 337.
SONIC: RECALL BY HEARING A PAST SOUND WITH THE "MIND'S
EAR." (From Dia1letics Terms.) 15.
sonorous: ofsounds or voice having a full, rich, loud and deep sounding
character. 331.
sooth: truth, reality or fact. 39.
sorry job: a difficult, dismal or troublesome affair. 35t.
soul (of): a person who perfectly represents some quality or attribute
such as truthfulness. 236.
spanned: extended or reached across from one point to another. 491.
Spartans: the citizens of Sparta, one ofthe cities of ancient Greece,
who in wanting to build a war-like people, killed children considered
too weak to become warriors, and sent boys at age seven to military
camps where they learned to endure harsh conditions and severe
discipline. 181.
specious: seeming to be good, sound, correct, logical, etc., without
really being so. 36.

DIANETICS: THE MODERN SCIENCE OF MENTAL HEALTH
spectrum: the entire range or extent ofsomething, arranged by degree,
with opposite values at its limits. 28.
Spencer, Herbert: (1820-1903) English philosopher known for his
application of the scientific doctrines of evolution to philosophy
and ethics. Spencer claimed that knowledge was of two kinds:
(1) knowledge gained by the individual, and (2) knowledge gained
by the race. He also believed that there is a basic and final reality
beyond our knowledge, which he called the "Unknowable." 9.
spin-bin: a colloquial term for a mental institution; a lunatic asylum.
406.
sport, good: a sociable, pleasant person who agrees without complaint
to do what is asked by a companion. 436.
sprayed off: scattered broadly as with a spraying action. 109.
spring: clear, as ifwith the rapid motion of a spring uncoiling. 131.
squalling: crying or screaming loudly and harshl~ 477.
square: cause to correspond to or harmonize with. 205.
square meals: nourishing or filling meals. 179.
squinn: feel or display discomfort or distress. 413.
stalemated: putinto a situation where progressis impossible. The term
comes from the game of chess describing the situation where one
player is unable to make any move without his most important piece,
the king, being in a position to be captured. When this happens the
game is ended in a tie. 316.
Stalingrad: the former name for Volgograd, an industrial and port city
in southwestern Russia on the Volga River. 486.
stammerer: one who speaks with difficult}', repeating sounds or words
and often stopping, before saying things correctly. 108.
STANDARD MEMORY BANK: THE STORAGE PLACE IN THE MIND
WHERE ALL CONSCIOUSLY PERCEIVED DATA (SIGHT, SOUND,
HEARING, SMELL, ORGANIC SENSATION, KINESTHESIA, TACTILE
AS WELL AS PAST MENTAL COMPUTATIONS) ARE RECORDED
AND RETAINED AND FROM WHICH THEY ARE RELAYED TO
THE ANALYTICAL MIND. INCLUDES ALL DATA OF A CONSCIOUS
NATURE FROM CONCEPTION TO "NOW." (From Di07let;cs Terms.)
vii.
station: the position someone holds in society or in an organization,
etc., in terms ofrank; social standing. 299.
620

EDITOR'S GLOSSARY OF WORDS, TERMS AND PHRASES

staved in: crushed in; broken inward. 159.
stayed the cold sharp hand of death: stopped, halted or checked the
process ofsomeone dying. 422.
stiff: difficult, requiring persistence. 39.
stigma: a mark ofdisgrace, something that detracts from the character
or reputation ofa person, group, etc. 33.
stigmatized: characterized or marked as disgraceful or very bad. 34.
stimuli: plural ofst;mll/'lIs, any action or agent that causes or changes
an activity in an organism, organ or part, as something that starts a
nerve impulse, activates a muscle, etc. 15.
stock: livestock; the horses, cattle, sheep and other useful animals kept
or raised on a fann or ranch. 137.
Stoics: members of an ancient Greek (300 B.C.) school of philosophy
or their followers who acted unaffected by joy, grief, pleasure or
pain. The school believed in the calm acceptance ofall occurrences
as the unavoidable result ofunalterable destiny. From the Greek stOll
(a porch), the place where this philosophy was taught. 39.
stream of consciousness: the continuous, uninterrupted flow of
thoughts and feelings through the mind. 107.
strewn: have something scattered over an area. 340.
strikes, 2.9: a reference to a strike in baseball-a player trying to hit
the ball and missing. When a player does so three times he loses his
turn and must leave the field ofplay. Because in baseball a batter can
only have 1, 2 or 3 strikes against him, 2.9 strikesis used figuratively
to refer to someone or something that has little chance ofsuccess.
175.
struck: encountered or hit; come upon. 261.
strummed: a figurative reference to poetry accompanied by a stringed
musical instrument, such as a guitar, harp, etc., which is strummed
(played by brushing the strings with the fingers). 374.
strychnine: a bitter, poisonous drug obtained from the seeds ofcertain
trees and plants found in such places as India, China and northern
Australia. 436.
stupor: a state of grogginess or apparent sleep. 395.
sub-vocal: characterized by the occurrence of spoken words with
barely audible sound. 364.
suffrage: the right to vote, especially in a political election. 224.
621

DIANETICS: THE MODERN SCIENCE OF MENTAL HEALTH
sulfa: a reference to suJfa drugs, any of a group of drugs once used to
treat a range of bacterial infections. 163.
summated: added together, summed up. 20.
summation signs: symbols used in higher mathematics to show the
total amount ofthings added together. 3.
summations of calculus: cakttltts is a branch ofmathematics used for
determining such quantities as the area of an irregularly shaped
object(as opposed to a square or circle). In making such calculations,
many figures are added together (summation). 77.
super-: above or beyond, more or higher than, above the range,
capacity, scope, etc. 216.
superabundance: more than a sufficient amount; excessive. 103.
super-moral: overly concerned with judging the goodness or badness
ofhuman action and character. 216.
SUPPRESSOR: THE EXTERIOR FORCES WHICH REDUCE THE
CHANCES OF THE SURVIVAL OF ANY FORM. (From Dianetics Terms.)
29.
supranational: outside or beyond the authority of one national
government. 486.
susceptible of: capable ofsubmitting successfully to an action, process
or operation. 90.
sustained: experienced orsuffered (inj~ loss, etc.). 210.
swab(s): a piece of soft material used by a doctor, nurse, etc., for
cleaning out an opening in the body (such as a nose). 154.
swami: an honorary title given to a Hindu religious teacher. 116.
switch: a slender flexible rod, stick or twig, especially one used for
whipping or disciplining. 318.
syllogism: a type ofargument consisting ofthree statements such that
the first two imply the conclusion. For example, "All trees have
roots. An oak is a tree. Therefore an oak tree has roots," or "Only
trees have roots. A bird is not a tree. Therefore a bird does not have
roots." 4°4-
sylvan: characteristic of, associated with or belonging to a woods or
forest; typical ofthe natural and pleasingsimplicityofthe countryside.
42.
622

EDITOR'S GLOSSARY OF WORDS, TERMS AND PHRASES
SYMBIOTE: ANY ENTITY OF LIFE OR ENERGY WHICH ASSISTS AN
INDIVIDUAL OR MAN IN HIS SURVIVAL. (From Diollet;cs Terms.)
iii.
symbolic logic: the use ofthe concepts and techniques ofmathematics
to solve situations in logic. Symbolic logic uses those parts oflogic that
can be modeled mathematically and manipulates these in attempting
to solve problems oflogic. One is manipulating meanings instead of
numbers. 77.
symbologists: a reference to psychiatrists who believe that dreams
symbolically represent one's waking experience and "repressed
desires." 256.
synopsis: a brief or condensed statement giving a general view of
something. i.
syphilis: an infectious disease, usually sexually transmitted, that
progresses in three stages. In its final stage the disease may attack
the brain, spinal cord and other parts ofthe bod}', causing blindness,
deafness, mental illness, heart failure, paralysis and bone deformities.
457.
tab: a small projection from a card, paper or folder used as an aid in
filing. Used figuratively. Page426.
tabloid: of or pertaining to a tabloid, a newspaper, usually half the
ordinary size, with many pictures and short, often sensational, news
stories. 372.
tacit: not expressed or declared openly, but implied or understood.
383-
tactile: the sense oftouch. vii.
tagged: given a nickname or assigned a verhallabel (such asJunior, in
Sam Smith,Junior). 257.
talisman: an object marked with magic signs and believed to give its
bearer supernatural powers or protection. 423.
talking-to: a scolding given to somebody, especially by somebody in
authority. 362.
tangling (with): becoming involved with or attempting to deal with
something difficult, confusing, problematic or the like. 434.
tapped: penetrated, opened up, reached into, etc., for the purpose of
using something or drawing something off; began to use. 146.
623

DIANETICS: THE MODERN SCIENCE OF MENTAL HEALTH
taunt: state unkind or insulting things to someone, especially about
their weaknesses or failures. 378.
technicolor: having bright, intense colors. This term comes from the
commercial film process called Technicolor, used in making color
motion pictures. 382.
telepathy: communication directly from one person's mind to
another's withoutspeech, writing or othersigns orsymbols. 104-
temporize: act to suit the time or occasion; adapt to a situation; bow
to practical necessities. 179.
tenacity: the quality or property of being tenacious (persistently
continuing, keeping a firm hold on); toughness. 50.
tended: cared for or looked after. 331.
tenderfoot: a raw, inexperienced person such as a newcomer to the
ranching and mining regions ofthe western United States, unused
to hardships. 376.
tendinitis: inflammation of a tendon, tough tissue that connects
muscle and bone. 225.
tension: mental or emotional strain; intense, suppressed suspense,
anxiety, or excitement. 328.
tentative: ofthe nature of or made or done as a trial, experiment; not
final. 192.
termagant: an overbearing, quarrelsome, scolding, nagging woman.
331.
Terra Incognita: an unknown or unexplored region. Latin "unknown
land." 1.
testosterone: a hormone that develops and maintains masculine
characteristics in the body. 117.
thalamus: a relay center in the brain for sensory information. 18.
therapy: the administration and application of Dianetics techniques
and procedures to resolve problems concerning human behavior and
psychosomatic illness. iii.
e(theta): the symbol for the eighth letter of the Greek alphabet.
In.
third-degree: involving intensive questioning or rough treatment by
police, which inflicts mental or physical suffering, in order to obtain
information or a confession. 458.

EDITOR'S GLOSSARY OF WORDS, TERMS AND PHRASES
Thirteen Ritualsfor Heavenly Bliss and Nirvana: a made-up name for
a book. 217.
three thousand cycle note: a high-pitched sound. Cycle refers to a
vibration. The more vibrations a sound wave has, the higher the
pitch. 437.
thunderous: of or related to powerful and persuasive language using
long words to impress others. 2.
thwart: oppose; prevent from accomplishing a purpose. 79.
thyroid: 1. a reference to the hormonessecreted by the thyroid gland.
117.
2. the thyroid gland, which regulates body growth and metabolism
(how fast cells convert oxygen and nutrients into energy and heat
for the body's use). The thyroid gland is located in the front ofthe
neck. 301.
tidings: news or information. 453.
TIME TRACK: THE TIMESPAN OF THE INDIVIDUAL FROM
CONCEPTION TO PRESENT TIME ON WHICH LIES THE SEQUENCE
OF EVENTS OF HIS LIFE. (From Dinnet;cs Te7'111S.) vii.
tomes: books, especially very heav~ large books. 9.
tom-tom: any ofvarious drums, as ofIndian or African tribes, usually
beaten with the hands and sometimes used by a medicine man or
tribal societies to drive demons or evil spirits out ofsomeone's body.
20+
tonnage: a large amount or weight. A ton is equivalent to 2,000 pounds.
The suffix -age means "collection of." 371.
tonsillectomy: an operation for the removal of the tonsils (small
round pieces offlesh at the sides ofthe throat near the back ofthe
tongue). 449.
tooth and claw: marked by fierce orsavage struggle,such as in a jungle.
Tooth andclaw is a variation oftooth and nail, often used in the phrase
to fight with tooth and nail, with the use of one's teeth and nails as
weapons. 36.
topectomy: an operation in which parts of the brain are removed.
237.
Torquemada: Tomas de Torquemada (1420-1498), Catholic monk
and chiefofficial ofthe Spanish Inquisition for fifteen years during
which time 2,000 people were executed for beliefs different from

DIANETICS: THE MODERN SCIENCE OF MENTAL HEALTH
those ofthe Church. His name has become synonymous with cruelt}r.
287.
tract: a system oforgans or body partsthatwork together to provide for
the passage ofsomething such as air, food or bodily waste products.
3.
tractability: the condition of being tractable (easily managed or
controlled). II.
trail is blazed: the path has been laid out and the route marked for
others to follow. Literally, to blaze a trail is to layout as a path by
marking trees with white by chipping off a piece of bark. I.
trance: a half-conscious state seemingly between sleeping and waking
in which ability to function voluntarily may be suspended. 17.
transcends: goes beyond the limit or range of. 94-
transference: in psychotherap}', the process whereby somebody, such
as a patient, unconsciously redirects feelings, fears or emotions onto
someone else, often the analYSt. The theory is that the feelings ofthe
patient do not originate in the present situation but merely repeat
earlier feelings he or she had for another (such as a parent) atsome
former time. 246.
transient: lasting only a short time; existing briefly; temporary. 30.
transorbital leukotomy: a psychiatric operation in which an ice pick
is forced through the back ofthe eye sockets, piercing the thin bone
thatseparates the eye sockets from the frontal lobes. The tip ofthe
ice pick is then inserted into the frontal lobes and the nerve fibers
connecting these to the rest ofthe brain are severed, resulting in the
patient becoming an emotional vegetable. 119.
travail(s): pain, extreme anxiety or emotional torment or suffering
resulting from mental or physical hardship. 372.
traversing: traveling or moving across, over or through an area or
place. 264-
treatment: the practice of Dianetics techniques and procedures to
resolve problems concerning human behavior and psychosomatic
illness. i.
treats (of): addresses or deals with. 378.
trifles: things that have little or no importance. 140.
626

EDITOR'S GLOSSARY OF WORDS, TERMS AND PHRASES
trinity: a combination orset ofthree individual things (as gods, persons,
things, etc.) that fonn a unity or are closely connected to one another.
419.
trinity, Hindu: a reference to the three great gods in Hinduism:
Brahma, the creator ofthe universe; Vishnu, the preserver of the
universe; and Shiva, who personifies both the destructive and the
procreative forces ofthe universe. A trinity is a combination or set
ofthree individual things (as gods, persons, things, etc.) that form a
unity or are closely connected to one another. 419.
tripe: nonsensical rubbish; anything worthless. 126.
trouncing: beating or thrashing severely. 428.
truck with, has no: has no dealings or communication with. 129.
trundle bed: a low bed on small wheels, that can be rolled under
another bed when not in use. 329.
Truth: in some schools ofthought, that which is thought of as true,
real or actual in a general or abstract sense, a truth that has no shades
ofgray but is complete and total in itself. The view ofsuch schools
is that this "Truth" lies beyond the realm of hurnan experience and
therefore cannot actually be known by anyone. 405.
tuberculosis: a serious infectious disease in which swellings appear on
the lungs and other parts ofthe bod}', once ranked among the most
common causes of death in the world. 113.
tubes: a reference to vacuum tu.bes, devices once broadly used in
electronics to control flows of electrical currents. They are called
vacuum tubes because they are sealed glasstubes or bulbsfrom which
almost all the air has been removed in order to improve electrical
flow. 287.
tuned down (or up): adjusted or prepared for operating in a specific
way. 114.
turned-on: made interested, excited with enthusiasm, likened to
flipping a switch such as one that allows electricity to flow.
291.
#12 gauge copper wire: wire that is approximately the thickness of
a wire coat hanger. Gauge refers to a standard measure or scale
ofmeasurement such as for the thickness or diameter of an object.
223.

DIANETICS: THE MODERN SCIENCE OF MENTAL HEALTH
"two little men ... hanging by their heels": reference to the motor
strip and sensory strip ofthe brain. The l1totor strip is a long narrow
area ofthe brain which is believed to control the movement ofthe
various muscles and movements ofthe bod}'. The sensory.rtripis a long
narrow area ofthe brain which is believed to monitor the senses ofthe
body such as sight, smell, touch and hearing. The medical term for
these strips ofthe brain is hOm1tnC1~ItIS- a Latin word meaning "little
man," to describe the function ofeach part ofthese strips which are
believed to correspond to the shape ofthe human body, with the top
ofthe strips monitoring the feet, the middle monitoring the torso and
the bottom monitoring the head, hence "upside down." To illustrate
the function ofthe strips, medical publications use illustrations of
two little men hangjng by their heels (see illustration). 352.
sensory strip ---h~---'I!!!Il~?.--~-r:;~ motor striP arm

face

2.9 strikes: a reference to a strike in baseball-a player trying to hit
the ball and missing. When a player does so three times he loses his
turn and must leave the field ofplay. Because in baseball a batter can
only have 1, 2 or 3 strikes against him, 2.9 strikesis used figuratively
to refer to someone or something that has little chance ofsuccess.
175.
two-valued logic: a system oflogic based on the principle that there is
no middle ground: something is either right or wrong, true or false,
yes or no. 295.
uncharted: notshown or located on a map; unexplored; unknown, as
a place or region. 479.
undermine: attack by indirect, secret or underhanded means, often by
degrees, somewhat comparable to the action ofwearing away a base
or foundation. 169.
undimensional: not having specified dimensions. Hence, unrestricted,
unbounded or limitless. 21.
undulating: fluctuating (according to the action ofan engram). 356.
Union, the: the United States. 205.
628

EDITOR'S GLOSSARY OF WORDS, TERMS AND PHRASES
universe: everything that exists everywhere; the whole space time
continuum in which we exist, together with all the matter and energy
within it, as opposed to the observable universe only. 9.
unremunerative: not giving back any helpful result in exchange for
work or effort that has been put in to some activity. 388.
unwieldy: notmentally manageable; not useful orworkable; impractical.
Literall~ unwieldy means difficult to carry or manage because ofbnlk
orshape. 242.
unwittingly: unknowingly; unconsciously; without awareness. v.
unyielding: notsurrendering or giving way, as to some force, influence,
pressure or the like. 315.
upstanding: honest and socially responsible; honorable. 291.
USurpS: takes over or seizes (without authority or right); employs
wrongfully. 287.
Utopian: of or like Utopia, an ideal and perfect place or state. The
word "Utopia" was first used in a book ofthe same name by English
writer Thomas More in 1516. Utopia is an account ofan ideal society,
with justice and equality for all citizens. 168.
vacillations: acts of wavering in mind, will or feeling; hesitations in
choice of opinions or courses. 225.
valence shift: see Book Three, Chapter Nine: Part One, section
entitled "Valence Shift." 341.
valiant: 1. worthy; excellent. 16.
2. boldly courageous; brave. 182.
variable(s): something subject to change. The term is most commonly
used in mathematics and science where it represents something
unknown or unpredictable. A variable is often contrasted with a
constant which is known and unchanging. 9.
vector: something which has both a direction and quantity. For
example, force would be a vector as it has a direction and an amount
but mass is not a vector as it has no direction. 52.
Veda: the earliest learned writings ofwhich there is any record. The
most ancientsacred literature ofthe Hindus, telling about evolution,
about Man coming into this universe and the curve of life which
is birth, growth, degeneration and decay. The word vedll means
knowledge. 35.

629

DIANETICS: THE MODERN SCIENCE OF MENTAL I-IEALTH
vengeance: punishment that is given in return for a wrong; revenge.
297.
vengeance, with a: to an extreme degree; in an intense manner.
282.
veracity: correctness or accuracy. 412.
veritable: possessing all ofthe distinctive qualities of the person or
thing specified. 413.
vignette, in: in one description of a person, place, situation, etc., that
captures the features ofthe broader picture. Literally; a vignette is a
small illustration that fades into its background without a definite
border. 389.
villain ofthe (this) piece: the person or thing that is guilty or
responsible for what is harmful orwrong in some activity orsituation.
Apiece is a theatrical play and the villain is the character whose evil
motives or actions form an important element in the plot and is
blamed for a particular evil or difficulty. 60.
virtue of, by: by reason of; as a result of. 311.
virus: a minute organism only capable ofreproducing inside another
living organism. Viruses are lifeless by themselves, cannotreproduce
and unlike living organisms, they are not made up of cells. 63.
VISIO: RECALL BY SEEING A PAST SIGHT WITH THE "MIND'S EYE."
(From Ditmetics Terms.) 20.
vivisecting: cutting apart a living body to examine the structure,
relation of parts or the like. 205.
volatile: having an energetic liveliness. 283.
volition: the power ofchoosing, deciding, exercising the will. 68.
volley: a burst or outpouring of many things at once or in quick
succession. 196.
voodoo: a body of beliefs and practices originally from Africa that
includes magic and the supposed exercise ofsupernatural powers
through the aid of evil spirits. 473.
wash, comes out in the: is eventually resolved satisfactorily or put
right. 365.
washed: gotten rid of; removed. 276.
wax: increase gradually in size and strength, said of human beings.
162.

EDITOR'S GLOSSARY OF WORDS, TERMS AND PHRASES
WCTU: Women's Christian Temperance Union, an organization
founded in 1874 which campaigns against alcohol use. Temperance
means the practice of not consuming alcoholic drinks. 436.
weary: 1. physically or mentally exhausted by hard work, exertion,
etc.; worn out; tired. 176.
2. characterized by or causing impatience or dissatisfaction. 412.
3. become impatient or dissatisfied with something. 462.
wearying: becoming tired. 136.
weather-vaning: constantly changing one's mind, like a weather vane
which changes direction with the wind. A weathe1" vane is a plate
of metal, usually of an ornamental form, placed high on top of a
building on a vertical rod so as to turn freely with the wind and show
the direction from which it is blowing. 414.
well-nigh: very nearly; almost. 36.
well, would be: would be suitable, proper or appropriate under the
circumstances. 30.
welter: a confused mass; jumble. 353.
whence: from what source, origin or cause. 341.
When Knighthood Was in Flower: title of a novel by Charles Major
(1856-1913) that captured the chivalry (courteous conduct) of
twelfth- and thirteenth-century England when knights were at their
height offame and prominence. 217.
whet: to make a feeling, sense or desire more keen or intense, as by
indulging in some activity to a small degree, in order to make a feeling
more pleasurable. Hence, "to whet hersadiS11t upon hhn" refers to a
person (a teacher) increasing the enjoyable intensity ofher sadism
by acting cruelly to her student. 372.
while, the: during the time, in the meantime; meanwhile, as in "And
yo'll might workfifty hoursfor it, releasing the case the while." 336.
whip hand: a position of advantage or control. Literally, a hand that
holds a whip, especially one used to drive horses. 88.
whirling dervish: a member ofa Turkish religious order ofmonks. As
part oftheir worship they spin around and dance to music. Dervish
is a word ofTurkish origin meaning "beggar." 330.
whispering campaign: the organized spreading ofrumors to destroy
the reputation of a person, organization, etc. 471.

DIANETICS: THE MODERN SCIENCE OF MENTAL HEALTH
whisde while Rome burns: a variation offiddle while Rome burns, a
saying alluding to a legend ofRoman emperor Nero Claudius Caesar
who inJuly A.D. 64 was said to have played a fiddle while a great fire
burned and destroyed most ofthe city ofRome. The saying is often
used to describe people who can remain indifferent and detached
while all hell is breaking loose around them. 219.
wholesale: extensive; performed on a large scale or affecting large
numbers or amounts. 13k
wielding the whip: exercising power or authority (through pain).
83.
wild variable: a factor in a situation or problem that behaves in an
uncontrolled, strange or unpredictable fashion. Variable is most
commonly used in mathematics and science where it represents
something unknown or unpredictable. Avariable is often contrasted
with a constant which is known and unchanging. 70.
wince: to make an expression of pain with the face because ofseeing
or thinking ofsomething unpleasant or embarrassing. 282.
wisdom teeth: one of the four teeth at the back of each side of the
upper and lower jaw of human beings. They are the last teeth to
emerge. 140.
wished offon: forced or imposed on someone. 158.
wistful: having or showing a feeling ofvague or regretful longing.
422.
with a vengeance: to an extreme degree; in an intense manner.
282.
without: at, to, or on the outside of; exterior to, as in "it is easierifthey
each look without the homefor a therapy partner. "374.
wits: 1. persons having or noted for saying smart or brilliant things,
sometimes so as to amuse others. Used here sarcastically. 81.
2. mind; understanding or intelligence. 263.
woe: deep distress or misery; misfortune. 2.
woman scorned: a reference to the phrase Hell hllth [has] no fury /ike Il
woman scorned, meaning no one has more fury or wrath than awoman
whose love has been rejected, or who thinks her worth or dignity
has been insulted, ignored, etc. 470.
word ofmouth, by: by speaking, as distinguished from writing or
other methods of expression; orally. 105.

EDITOR'S GLOSSARY OF WORDS, TERMS AND PHRASES
worksheet: a sheet of paper on which work schedules, working time,
etc., are recorded. 236.
wracked: subjected to extreme